Caption: are going to talk a lot about
Caption: different approaches
Caption: what the trade-offs are and far far less
Caption: about the technology
Caption: one really common pitfall is just
Caption: reading the front page of these
Caption: technologies dynamo is another one that
Caption: comes up you go by kafka whatever
Caption: they're going to pitch to you all these
Caption: great benefits
Caption: and they're going to say it's so
Caption: flexible it's useful in all of these
Caption: cases
Caption: you're really going to have to dig for
Caption: some of those trade-offs
Caption: if you don't understand this well if you
Caption: don't understand what you're trying to
Caption: solve
Caption: you're going to end up in a bit of hot
Caption: water
Caption: you're going to end up with a
Caption: delayed
Caption: or incomplete solution
Caption: we haven't really gone through the
Caption: requirements so who knows what we're
Caption: really building
Caption: if we've
Caption: if we're going to have a
Caption: lot of back and forth a product
Caption: after we've
Caption: already done a lot of upfront design
Caption: there's going to be delays it's going to
Caption: be oh but i thought we were going to
Caption: build it this way not that way
Caption: if you don't talk to product at all
Caption: they're going to think you're building
Caption: one thing and you're going to have built
Caption: another thing
Caption: your solution is going to be incomplete
Caption: it's also going to be expensive
Caption: you haven't really done much to
Caption: look at where your data is going look at
Caption: what compute you're going to need
Caption: so you're going to end up throwing a lot
Caption: of hardware at it which is going to come
Caption: in a lot of cost
Caption: it's also going to be unreliable
Caption: we've put up design up there
Caption: but
Caption: how much throughput are we actually
Caption: trying to handle how much load
Caption: do we need does our system need to be
Caption: able to support
Caption: and of course
Caption: it's going to be buggy as well
Caption: especially if you're going to go with
Caption: those hot new databases with a lot of
Caption: eventual consistency but we're going to
Caption: go through that later
Caption: so the interview is very nice very
Caption: professional very polite
Caption: she's gonna
Caption: let you down gently and just say i don't
Caption: have any more questions
Caption: why should she
Caption: we haven't really demonstrated our
Caption: ability to explain our decisions so
Caption: she's going to save everyone time
Caption: as i mentioned at the start
Caption: we've made a few different mistakes here
Caption: but i'm going to take a shot at
Caption: distilling it down into one
Caption: really
Caption: what i think is a common cause
Caption: and giving it away a bit early but i
Caption: really think the mistake is
Caption: unintentional design
Caption: what i mean by that is we can get very
Caption: caught up in applying best practice
Caption: the best the newest technology the one
Caption: with the most before purported benefits
Caption: the problem with that is when we're
Caption: asked to explain these decisions why do
Caption: we pick this and not something else
Caption: we might not be able to explain that
Caption: and that's kind of what i mean by
Caption: unintentional if it was an intentional
Caption: design
Caption: we'd much better be able to say yes this
Caption: is why we chose it
Caption: what we've actually done is really
Caption: sidestepped thinking about the problem
Caption: and just gone for a lot of shortcut
Caption: heuristics right which
Caption: i think best practices can be sometimes
Caption: so let's try this whole process again
Caption: but this time we'll do it with a bit
Caption: more intention
Caption: so let's wind back the clock
Caption: we
Caption: what is system design and i just copied
Caption: this straight from wikipedia
Caption: it's defined at the architecture well
Caption: we've got a diagram so i guess we have
Caption: an architecture
Caption: we have product design
Caption: actually no we don't have product design
Caption: modules interfaces data we ain't got
Caption: that we haven't really talked about it
Caption: we don't have requirements to start with
Caption: now the product design part is easy
Caption: we're just going to blame product we'll
Caption: just stonewall them off
Caption: give our solution and then fall over
Caption: what we actually want to do
Caption: is really collaborate without with
Caption: product or your interviewer
Caption: or just your team in general
Caption: i think
Caption: this works both ways
Caption: product may some may simply throw
Caption: requirements over the wall and not
Caption: really want questions so you can do this
Caption: one reverse as well you deliver a
Caption: solution and blame engineering
Caption: if your company's particularly low on
Caption: funds you can blame each other much as
Caption: you want while you're packing all your
Caption: things into your boxes because
Caption: we fail to launch
Caption: so
Caption: on to the walkthrough
Caption: how we're going to get ourselves out of
Caption: this mess where we've thrown together a
Caption: really unintentional design
Caption: the first place to start
Caption: is function requirements
Caption: what are we actually trying to build
Caption: when we have a discussion with products
Caption: what are we going to talk about
Caption: we want to have a common understanding
Caption: of what we're trying to build
Caption: so
Caption: running back the clock
Caption: we want to talk about
Caption: sorry we want to design a social media
Caption: application
Caption: where users can share messages with
Caption: their friends
Caption: so
Caption: what's the what are the key features
Caption: what things do we need to provide so
Caption: that customers can do that
Caption: the first thing
Caption: users do need to be able to post
Caption: messages
Caption: that's an important one
Caption: we also want to make sure that
Caption: people can share
Caption: these messages with their friends
Caption: how they're going to do that is by
Caption: following each other
Caption: and we also want to make sure that
Caption: you've got a nice feed of what all your
Caption: friends are saying
Caption: i think we can focus on these three
Caption: what i want to stress is that
Caption: you don't have to design every part of
Caption: your application here
Caption: you want to spend most of your time most
Caption: of your effort looking at
Caption: areas or features where either your
Caption: product has a lot of risk around it a
Caption: lot of risk around that feature
Caption: or where you're really going to extract
Caption: a lot of competitive advantage
Caption: and i think if we get these things right
Caption: at the very least we do actually have a
Caption: social media platform
Caption: so what about those things we left by
Caption: the side let's say authentication for
Caption: example
Caption: we can talk through that so for
Caption: authentication there's a lot of nice
Caption: patterns for doing this
Caption: i want to say it's a largely solved
Caption: problem
Caption: i'm going to tell my interview with that
Caption: they're going to be okay with it
Caption: and we're going to move on
Caption: if they're not okay with of course you
Caption: can have a bit of a chat about it
Caption: so
Caption: we've made some progress here
Caption: just by refining the functional
Caption: requirements we at least know what we're
Caption: going to build what our product is going
Caption: to look like
Caption: it's
Caption: there's less risk of your solution being
Caption: delayed
Caption: or
Caption: incomplete
Caption: you still have all these other problems
Caption: though how are we going to deliver these
Caption: useless cases to our to our users
Caption: so we're going to move on to fun
Caption: non-functional requirements the things
Caption: that aren't features well we really need
Caption: to think through
Caption: and i think this is where it gets really
Caption: interesting
Caption: actually i'll expand a bit more on that
Caption: to be clear these are going to be things
Caption: that our application needs to support
Caption: it just isn't a feature
Caption: users aren't going to be too aware of it
Caption: and you're not going to put it up on
Caption: your website
Caption: so
Caption: throughput
Caption: how much traffic does your site need to
Caption: handle
Caption: there's
Caption: two major ways this gets split up
Caption: read throughput so reading against your
Caption: data stores reading against your
Caption: services is usually pretty easy to scale
Caption: and scale horizontally too
Caption: right throughput is a lot tougher and
Caption: comes a lot of trade-offs
Caption: which we're going to discuss later
Caption: so do we need to go away for a few weeks
Caption: and talk to our data team and really get
Caption: an exact picture of how much traffic we
Caption: are handling how many users we have or
Caption: we haven't launched it how many users
Caption: we're going to have
Caption: not really we can be pretty rough about
Caption: it we just want to get a rough picture
Caption: of is it a lot of throughput is it a
Caption: little bit of throughput
Caption: so we can start with some napkin math
Caption: a pretty standard prompt for this we can
Caption: just ask hey
Caption: how many users are we expecting to have
Caption: we're going to get back a number and
Caption: this is something collaborate product or
Caption: if it's an interviewer they'll likely
Caption: just hand it over to you
Caption: let's just say we have 100 million users
Caption: from that we can start to build a
Caption: picture we also need to know what
Caption: they're going to do in a day right we
Caption: want to know what is going to be hitting
Caption: our services
Caption: so we can kind of go with our gut fear
Caption: here
Caption: we're going to say oh an average user is
Caption: going to post up five messages a day
Caption: uh they're going to follow one of their
Caption: friends
Caption: and i'm going to doom scroll a little
Caption: bit
Caption: i have 20 views per user per day
Caption: sure
Caption: so we can start to get some rough maths
Caption: if we have 100 million daily app users
Caption: and we have five messages a day that's
Caption: 500 million messages a day or about 6
Caption: 000 requests a second
Caption: if our users are following one other
Caption: user a day 100 million
Caption: followers a day 1200 requests a second
Caption: those are both right ones those are both
Caption: right throughputs that's how many write
Caption: requests we're going to need to handle
Caption: look it's kind of around the mid-range
Caption: the last one is reads
Caption: we're going to have to do 2 billion
Caption: reads a day
Caption: 20
Caption: feed
Caption: 20 users requesting their feed every day
Caption: up per user per day
Caption: so 24 000 requests read requests a
Caption: second
Caption: it's getting up there
Caption: we'll make a note of that and we'll come
Caption: back to that later that's going to help
Caption: guide our design
Caption: we also need to take stock of
Caption: availability
Caption: so availability is our system's ability
Caption: to fulfill a functional requirement
Caption: it needs to succeed within a certain
Caption: span of time
Caption: why is that important
Caption: if users on our app try to send a
Caption: message and they keep getting errors or
Caption: it takes 30 seconds every time you post
Caption: a message to get a confirmation it's
Caption: going to be a pretty crummy experience
Caption: again
Caption: and i'm going to hammer this in so much
Caption: it's in collaboration with your product
Caption: team
Caption: well with with your wider team really
Caption: we're going to say
Caption: our users
Caption: most of the time
Caption: get a response within half a second when
Caption: they try to send a message
Caption: it feels about right again we can kind
Caption: of use our gut as long as we're sending
Caption: these products uh these expectations
Caption: with product
Caption: we can follow another when we go to
Caption: click follow on another user it succeeds
Caption: most of the time within about two
Caption: seconds
Caption: it's done less often and users will kind
Caption: of
Caption: just accept it that's what we think
Caption: anyway we don't have to get it perfectly
Caption: right we can always refine these things
Caption: to now solution after we launch as long
Caption: as we've set our expectations with
Caption: product
Caption: the last one is really important for our
Caption: we want to encourage well it's
Caption: engagement right we really want users to
Caption: get stuck in that loop of just scrolling
Caption: and reviewing all of their friends posts
Caption: so that really needs to be really quite
Caption: reliable and happen pretty quickly you
Caption: don't want them waiting or if they get
Caption: an error screen
Caption: they could very well leave right
Caption: we'll make a note of that and come back
Caption: to that later
Caption: consistency is really interesting one as
Caption: well consistency deals with guarantees
Caption: so
Caption: what what are the characteristics of our
Caption: system when we
Caption: write data and read data back from it
Caption: it's a whole huge topic all by itself
Caption: that i'm not going to go into
Caption: but
Caption: we can think we're going to use two
Caption: major models to categorize it for today
Caption: we have strong consistency
Caption: where all of your accesses are seen in
Caption: sequence
Caption: that maybe sounds a bit babbling
Caption: the important thing is this also means
Caption: when we write data to our stores or
Caption: right down to our services as soon as we
Caption: try to read it we're going to get the
Caption: latest state back it's strongly
Caption: consistent
Caption: on the other end of the scale and i
Caption: promise we'll get something for this is
Caption: eventual consistency
Caption: so
Caption: with eventually consistent systems
Caption: you're going to have all these updates
Caption: coming in
Caption: but when you go to read
Caption: at any time they might have said yeah
Caption: we've accepted this right we've accepted
Caption: this new data
Caption: but you might not get the latest data
Caption: the only guarantee this gives you is
Caption: that
Caption: if right stop coming in we'll eventually
Caption: get the latest state
Caption: let's take an ordering app for example
Caption: amazon or something
Caption: when we go and order
Caption: a new book
Caption: with a strongly consistent system when
Caption: we've got our order history
Caption: we're going to see oh the new book we've
Caption: ordered
Caption: cool easy
Caption: if we have
Caption: an eventually consistent back end what
Caption: we might see is we purchase a book
Caption: we go to the order history
Caption: and there's nothing there
Caption: that sounds really bad
Caption: in that case how can eventual eventual
Caption: consistency be feasible
Caption: there's actually a lot of ways around
Caption: this
Caption: but most almost all of them will add
Caption: complexity
Caption: or otherwise impact the user flow for
Caption: example you might just say hey if you
Caption: bought in the past 15 minutes might not
Caption: show up here
Caption: you might also just choose to show a
Caption: spinner or something
Caption: rather than
Caption: show a stale state to put the customer
Caption: at ease
Caption: either way
Caption: you're adding complexity application
Caption: and
Caption: i did promise we'll get something in
Caption: return
Caption: with strong consistency we get these
Caption: nice consistent views
Caption: it's very easy to use easy to debug easy
Caption: to reason about easy to write it's very
Caption: nice
Caption: one thing we can do
Caption: with eventually consistent systems is
Caption: really scale out our rights
Caption: with a lot of these strongly consistent
Caption: stores
Caption: it's difficult
Caption: to scale to to scale these rights
Caption: horizontally we can't really have a
Caption: cluster of right nodes that's not how it
Caption: works
Caption: instead
Caption: let's say we have a big sql server
Caption: database
Caption: all we can really do is scale it up and
Caption: up and up
Caption: you're going to hit limits there in what
Caption: you can
Caption: actually provide
Caption: and it's going to be awfully expensive
Caption: with eventually consistent systems
Caption: we're basically accepting hey i don't
Caption: mind if this system returns a stale
Caption: result i'd rather be more available
Caption: this also means
Caption: we get a lot of
Caption: there's a lot of techniques that now
Caption: become available to us to improve right
Caption: throughput
Caption: a lot of those hinge on things like
Caption: asynchronous replication
Caption: making sure that we
Caption: a
Caption: you know a log of our transactions
Caption: can be sensibly replicated to all of the
Caption: other nodes in our cluster which are
Caption: handling
Caption: a little slice of our right throughput
Caption: so that's consistency why should come
Caption: back a little bit on that one we go and
Caption: talk about
Caption: talk a little bit more about databases
Caption: so how does that actually matter for
Caption: application
Caption: is it okay
Caption: if a user's feed doesn't show a message
Caption: that they've just posted
Caption: potentially
Caption: it's not nice but we know we want to
Caption: handle quite a bit of throughput here
Caption: and for interest sake we're going to say
Caption: yeah we want to make that eventually
Caption: consistent
Caption: we'll accept a bit of complexity in our
Caption: application
Caption: with follows it's a bit more hazy
Caption: if you follow another user do you
Caption: necessarily expect to see all their
Caption: messages in your feed right away
Caption: i think that's been more of a gray area
Caption: you could argue that hey
Caption: if i'm interested in what this person
Caption: has to say i want to get their messages
Caption: right now
Caption: but there could also be a case made that
Caption: we wanted to have that extra performance
Caption: we don't mind if it takes a little while
Caption: for those friends messages to show up
Caption: with viewing our feed
Caption: i'd argue it's much the other way
Caption: we can accept if one of your friends
Caption: posts a new message
Caption: you're not gonna see it right away it
Caption: could be five ten seconds it could be a
Caption: minute
Caption: again one of those things you really
Caption: want to
Caption: drive with product as long as your
Caption: expectations are aligned i think we're
Caption: in a good place
Caption: so let's discuss that with our friend
Caption: our interviewer is it okay if the feed
Caption: sometimes out of date
Caption: sure thing andrew is very nice she just
Caption: says yes to whatever we say
Caption: the last one here
Caption: a little bit more routine
Caption: where is this all this data where is all
Caption: this user data going to go
Caption: if we've got terabytes and terabytes and
Caption: terabytes we need a store somewhere we
Caption: don't want to go and run out of
Caption: disk space in our database halfway
Caption: through or run out on some other
Caption: store another one that we're not going
Caption: to go too much into is the durability of
Caption: your data don't always assume you need
Caption: to store all of your data
Caption: there's actually many cases where you're
Caption: going to receive user data and you're
Caption: either going to store it temporarily
Caption: or you're gonna store somewhere
Caption: transient you don't care if that machine
Caption: crashes and that data goes away
Caption: it's it's nice to have
Caption: so similar to what we did for throughput
Caption: let's do a little bit of napkin math
Caption: to see how much data we need to store
Caption: we're going to put up a little bit of a
Caption: simple schema here i hope it's not too
Caption: controversial just a unique identifier
Caption: for the message
Caption: when it was created we'll generate that
Caption: server side
Caption: message and a little bit of metadata
Caption: around it a better data give us a bit of
Caption: flexibility maybe we want to stuff
Caption: something in there later
Caption: that's not the point the point is we've
Caption: got about 250 bytes of data here
Caption: per row
Caption: we already know
Caption: we've we've done that
Caption: we've gone asked how many users we have
Caption: how many messages we expect users to
Caption: post each day
Caption: and i hope my math is right here that
Caption: should be 125 gigs a day
Caption: or 40 terabytes a year
Caption: this does matter
Caption: i use postgreso raw rod a lot my
Caption: day-to-day
Caption: that has a database name of 128
Caption: terabytes
Caption: that means within a few years we're
Caption: going to start
Caption: to have to either we're going to have
Caption: we're going to have to start deleting
Caption: data
Caption: or we can have a look an archiving
Caption: process up front
Caption: on the other hand
Caption: be careful other limits as well
Caption: we just ran into a problem where one of
Caption: our tables is standard xc it's it's
Caption: getting really close to its limit
Caption: process has a limit limit of 32
Caption: terabytes
Caption: know your technology
Caption: so
Caption: now that we've gone through what our app
Caption: needs to support both from a function
Caption: and non-functional sense
Caption: we're gonna go with something a
Caption: tiny bit more esoteric
Caption: is the schema
Caption: how are we going to send this
Caption: information around our system
Caption: we don't need to talk about it in too
Caption: much detail just enough for us to reason
Caption: about the parts of our system
Caption: remember our three use cases
Caption: want to better post a message
Caption: we want to be able to follow other users
Caption: and we want to be able to view
Caption: other uses feeds
Caption: you can see this is missing a whole
Caption: bunch of stuff
Caption: but we've got the key points here you
Caption: want to post a message include your
Caption: message in our follow user you include
Caption: the user id
Caption: you want to view the feed you're going
Caption: to just send them a request and you're
Caption: hopefully going to get back a big list
Caption: of messages
Caption: the last part
Caption: ties it all together but i think it's
Caption: actually the probably the least juicy
Caption: part so if we go back to the very
Caption: standard looking stack we had before
Caption: how are we actually going to talk to
Caption: our services from our client
Caption: i think we
Caption: what i've seen a lot is people are going
Caption: to generally default to rest
Caption: and that's what i really want to
Caption: hammer down on or push back on
Caption: we don't want to be in the habit of
Caption: defaulting to certain technologies and
Caption: it's our instinct because we develop
Caption: expertise with these specific
Caption: technologies same with our database
Caption: a lot of the time and a lot of time it's
Caption: okay
Caption: but i'd like us to be a bit more
Caption: intentional about how we design these
Caption: instances instead of saying we'll just
Caption: use sql server because we have that we
Caption: have that there i know how to use it
Caption: a quick overview of some of the other
Caption: things out there that aren't rest i'm
Caption: not going to go too much into rest
Caption: i think most of us are pretty aware of
Caption: how to use it we use a lot in our
Caption: day-to-day
Caption: it's mature
Caption: it's battle tested
Caption: it caches really nicely too
Caption: but what about the other stuff
Caption: should we hop straight to graphql
Caption: graphql is really cool right we can do a
Caption: declarative query instead of have been
Caption: beholden to different endpoints we can
Caption: say hey i just want this data
Caption: i want to get you know these messages
Caption: and
Caption: from these users it's really nice for
Caption: the front end teams
Caption: also cuts a bit cuts down a bit on how
Caption: much data we need to fetch with your
Caption: rest endpoints you generally get the
Caption: whole resource back with graph you're
Caption: only going to get what you asked for
Caption: grpc
Caption: fancy
Caption: super fast to deserialize and serialize
Caption: data because it's just going to send
Caption: binary representations over the wire
Caption: why don't we just use that instead
Caption: well
Caption: browsers don't have very good support
Caption: for it so if you want to use it for
Caption: users to send requests to your server
Caption: you're going to need a proxy in between
Caption: so adding complexity there it is however
Caption: very very nice to serve the server comes
Caption: there's trade-offs with that
Caption: but if you have massive scale these
Caption: these are things that are going to save
Caption: you a whole lot of money really going to
Caption: cut down how much compute you need
Caption: i promise to talk a little about
Caption: databases
Caption: where we're going to put our data
Caption: a lot of the time we're going to default
Caption: to the one of these right
Caption: we're going to default to postgres i
Caption: love postgres i love sql server i love
Caption: my sequel
Caption: these have a few things in common
Caption: they'll run off a relational model model
Caption: and they're going to generally have one
Caption: write to node
Caption: and support for read replicas and i know
Caption: there's plugins which let you do
Caption: may let you do more replication and
Caption: sharding around that
Caption: generally
Caption: i think all of these are going to be
Caption: strongly consistent they just have that
Caption: one writer node
Caption: if
Caption: it's in a case where i can't send you
Caption: up-to-date data it's going to fail
Caption: instead the system will become
Caption: unavailable and you're going to get
Caption: nothing
Caption: the benefit of this is of course it's
Caption: much easier
Caption: to design your applications you you
Caption: don't have to deal with potential
Caption: consistency
Caption: which you are going to have to deal with
Caption: a lot
Caption: in
Caption: no sql databases
Caption: a lot of these will
Caption: say they provide strongly consistent
Caption: reads
Caption: but there's going to be a lot of
Caption: asterisks around that
Caption: once we release ourselves from that
Caption: requirement
Caption: to have always up-to-date information
Caption: like i said before a lot of techno a lot
Caption: of techniques become available to you to
Caption: support more availability and more
Caption: throughput even semantically you're
Caption: going to get more availability simply
Caption: because the system will say it's fine
Caption: that i'm out of date here's your data
Caption: so that's that big trade-off
Caption: are you willing to accept eventual
Caption: consistency
Caption: if you're going to get a lot of
Caption: three-point availability out of it
Caption: there are ways you're going to get more
Caption: complexity in your system in your
Caption: applications
Caption: or you're going to affect the user flow
Caption: in some way
Caption: we also want to talk about
Caption: data flows
Caption: so how
Caption: data flows through our system
Caption: now that we've got a bit of our schema
Caption: we can have a think about okay these
Caption: requests are coming in
Caption: can we do some pre-computation so that
Caption: when the user goes to fetch a certain
Caption: piece of data
Caption: it's already there hot in the cache or
Caption: in a server somewhere
Caption: [Music]
Caption: as a little bit of flip side you have
Caption: caching
Caption: once you've done a bit of work to
Caption: compute something maybe someone's feed
Caption: or something like that
Caption: why not just save it somewhere so if
Caption: they ask again for we can bring it back
Caption: quickly we don't want to have to do all
Caption: that work of looking up
Caption: who you know who are their friends
Caption: what messages
Caption: have their friends sent
Caption: to build that picture every time it's a
Caption: lot of work
Caption: there's concerns around this as well
Caption: your caching layer can fail
Caption: you don't want your application to come
Caption: unavailable so there's complexity here
Caption: again
Caption: for performance
Caption: it's common theme right
Caption: so
Caption: i'm actually going to give you something
Caption: that's not particularly
Caption: it's not a perfect architecture or even
Caption: a great architecture
Caption: but it's something that
Caption: i can back up
Caption: is something where if you ask me
Caption: questions about it i can at least give
Caption: you some
Caption: amount of explanation about why i've
Caption: done things a certain way
Caption: i've cut out the static assets part
Caption: that's a bit less interesting
Caption: we've got our three main requests
Caption: posting a message
Caption: following another user
Caption: and getting a feedback what our friends
Caption: have said
Caption: so
Caption: going back to talking about
Caption: picking the right technology
Caption: and
Caption: i'll add some caveats into this later
Caption: we've put in a graph db
Caption: for our
Caption: so uh for our social graph service
Caption: we've got something optimized to help us
Caption: get
Caption: a list of friends
Caption: for a certain user
Caption: graph databases are pretty cool they
Caption: store relationships as a first class
Caption: thing not the element themselves
Caption: that means when you're looking for
Caption: relationships based off a certain node
Caption: it's going to be much faster than doing
Caption: the same on a relational database
Caption: a lot of these are eventually consistent
Caption: but as we said before we're going to go
Caption: accept that we've discussed that with
Caption: product it's it's okay you're not going
Caption: to get your friends latest messages
Caption: right away
Caption: similar when we post a message so we can
Caption: do a bit of pre-computation here we
Caption: don't want to lose these messages that
Caption: would be bad if everyone just you know
Caption: you posted all these messages and
Caption: you want to see them later reminisce
Caption: about what you and your friends have
Caption: been talking about so we'll
Caption: put a database up there somewhere
Caption: it could be postgres it could be
Caption: they both work
Caption: but we're also going to send something
Caption: to an asynchronous worker a feed updater
Caption: so when we know that a message has come
Caption: in we're going to go up and update
Caption: your people who are following you we're
Caption: going to inject this new message into
Caption: all of those feeds
Caption: that means
Caption: if we've done a good job keeping our
Caption: caching layer consistent
Caption: when requests come in a lot of users
Caption: especially for the active users you're
Caption: going to get your feed right away our
Caption: servers have can do a whole lot less
Caption: work in
Caption: generating users feeds
Caption: so
Caption: it's in considering things like that
Caption: i think we get a lot of value
Caption: you can explain your decisions
Caption: you're explaining why you're using
Caption: something and not something else
Caption: you're picking the right technology
Caption: there's next steps there's things i
Caption: haven't covered
Caption: so moving forward it's doing a bit
Caption: better than this
Caption: you want to find ways where you can deal
Caption: with less data
Caption: and that's where we kind of talked about
Caption: can we pre-compute something
Caption: can we case something just so we have
Caption: less
Caption: data that needs to be computed on the
Caption: fly center here and there
Caption: picking the right tool
Caption: so really reasoning about
Caption: what
Caption: i'm using this technology because this
Caption: i know it's got these cons but that's
Caption: okay
Caption: and we're all in line with product about
Caption: that
Caption: i've also haven't talked about
Caption: some of the more
Caption: for example
Caption: shouting it's going to improve your
Caption: right throughput but
Caption: that's kind of a whole topic in itself
Caption: there's more complexity there how are
Caption: you going to split your data up among
Caption: different shards things like that
Caption: few edge cases as well
Caption: like
Caption: sorry
Caption: while our solution works well for
Caption: cases where users don't have a lot of
Caption: followers
Caption: because that little sync worker is going
Caption: to go and update people's feeds
Caption: if we have lady gaga come in with a 30
Caption: million followers and post a message
Caption: that's going to be massive right volume
Caption: these are the kind of edge case that you
Caption: want to think about
Caption: there's a cautionary tale here as well
Caption: you don't want to be
Caption: when you're picking the right tool
Caption: you also want to think about your team's
Caption: skill set
Caption: there's
Caption: not much reason to adapt a technology
Caption: there's a few ways you can approach it
Caption: either
Caption: you
Caption: tend to shy away
Caption: from using a technology
Caption: that
Caption: your team
Caption: doesn't know how to use
Caption: or that you think you're going to have
Caption: difficulty hiring for
Caption: another way and this takes a lot of
Caption: effort is to drive consensus
Caption: among your wider engineering team about
Caption: adopting a technology because it allows
Caption: us to do x y z and i can't stress how
Caption: much effort and how exhausting that can
Caption: be even in the best run
Caption: organizations
Caption: you want to look at procurement as well
Caption: there's going to be a lot of people in
Caption: the company who are going to be
Caption: pretty unhappy if you're like i want to
Caption: grab this technology uh
Caption: i'm going to grab you know cockroach
Caption: here and i like this from aws and i like
Caption: this from azure and i like this from gcp
Caption: it's going to be a real headache
Caption: there's contracts here that need to be
Caption: negotiated there's money
Caption: it's a lot work more work than it might
Caption: appear at first
Caption: thought and there's always you aren't
Caption: going to need it
Caption: i think
Caption: we have a natural tendency to want to
Caption: avoid
Caption: maybe future uncertainty or future risk
Caption: so
Caption: we can end up over engineering our
Caption: systems
Caption: we'll put this big eventually consistent
Caption: system in place
Caption: and spend a lot more time
Caption: working around the complexity just that
Caption: than building out our core system
Caption: so please please please there's a lot of
Caption: you aren't going to need it
Caption: you can apply here
Caption: remember what your competitive advantage
Caption: is and focus on that
Caption: there generally is time to
Caption: scale up later do a bit of
Caption: re-architecturing if you're doing well
Caption: so with this we're doing a bit better
Caption: we've maybe adopted grbc for our service
Caption: to service comms
Caption: we know what sort of report we need to
Caption: handle and we have a
Caption: plan in place for it
Caption: and product isn't getting any nasty
Caption: surprises we've reasoned about
Caption: how
Caption: our system is going to perform how it's
Caption: going to behave for customers
Caption: it's always going to be buggy i don't
Caption: think we can solve that one that's a
Caption: tale for a different day
Caption: the point is we're not trying to
Caption: completely
Caption: avoid failure here we're just trying to
Caption: make sure we do our due diligence
Caption: and we've reasoned about our system
Caption: sensibly
Caption: so
Caption: the key takeaway is just quickly please
Caption: please please talk to product ask lots
Caption: of questions
Caption: we need to stop this
Caption: habit i still see of waiting for product
Caption: to give us our requirements or product
Caption: just giving the engineering team
Caption: requirements and not really expecting
Caption: any questions
Caption: we can get a lot of value out of just
Caption: talking
Caption: again design with intent
Caption: explain why you've chosen something
Caption: and why you haven't chosen something
Caption: design often
Caption: you're going to do this a lot at your
Caption: workplace
Caption: if you get into this good habit you're
Caption: going to get a lot of very you're going
Caption: to build a lot of experience assistant
Caption: design is something that does take a lot
Caption: of experience but if you get in the
Caption: habit of thinking about it the right way
Caption: it's really going to improve your
Caption: ability to
Caption: reason
Caption: design makes sense right practice
Caption: on the side there's so much great
Caption: information about their white papers
Caption: tech blogs videos go and do your study
Caption: look at how twitter's built there's lots
Caption: of stuff out there instagram netflix
Caption: there's so much free material out there
Caption: you can kind of run through why they did
Caption: a certain way
Caption: and then take a step back and try to
Caption: design it
Caption: yourself cool
Caption: thank you very much
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: follow the recipe i just follow that
Caption: recipe and innovate
Caption: yes
Caption: at the interview itself you just want to
Caption: follow in a structured way and this was
Caption: actually
Caption: something that
Caption: we
Caption: really agreed
Caption: wasn't really not structured way of
Caption: doing it non-functional requirements
Caption: function requirements
Caption: like how much
Caption: how much traffic your servers are going
Caption: to need to handle schema
Caption: stuff like that you just want to be able
Caption: to explain these things and it's so
Caption: important when you're talking to
Caption: stakeholders or senior engineering
Caption: leadership as well so i can use that
Caption: throughout my working life really
Caption: absolutely perfect okay so i'm going to
Caption: open up the floor for a q a session uh
Caption: does anyone have a question for nick
Caption: okay this man over here please
Caption: nick hey
Caption: working yeah
Caption: uh well thanks for excellent talk um
Caption: so you you mentioned you know uh always
Caption: reason about why you choose one tech
Caption: over the other and it's built on an
Caption: assumption that you know all the tech
Caption: and you
Caption: pretty much and you know
Caption: you know what's out there you know
Caption: alternatives you know pros and cons
Caption: what's like the the best behavior if you
Caption: deal with some systems that you don't
Caption: know much about like i don't know
Caption: someone's told you to design time series
Caption: heavy application and
Caption: you don't have a previous experience so
Caption: how would you
Caption: you know operate in this kind of
Caption: situations yeah that's a really good
Caption: question
Caption: if someone approached me and said hey
Caption: i'd like to build this with a time
Caption: series database
Caption: i'd basically say why
Caption: the first thing you want to ask is what
Caption: are we trying to solve
Caption: what do we
Caption: what is the problem that needs a time
Caption: series database for example if it's
Caption: something like
Caption: obviously time based right like
Caption: a lot of your observability metrics
Caption: something like that
Caption: then
Caption: sure it's not something i'd probably
Caption: discourage people from trying to deep
Caption: dive into everything that's not
Caption: something you can do
Caption: instead you want to have awareness of
Caption: the different classes of database so
Caption: you've got your like you know why column
Caption: stores like cassandra or your time
Caption: series database like you mentioned graph
Caption: databases and so on
Caption: as long as you have an awareness of it
Caption: then you could you can go back and say
Caption: hey
Caption: okay after our discussion looks like the
Caption: time series database is the right way to
Caption: go
Caption: i don't have much experience on this i'm
Caption: going to have to do a bit of a deep dive
Caption: on it and i think that's that's a plenty
Caption: reasonable path forwards
Caption: does i kind of ask the question yeah
Caption: interview
Caption: so what can happen is if you throw a
Caption: technology you aren't very confident
Caption: about it can really fall apart and
Caption: that's why stress is so important to
Caption: learn about the underlying concepts of
Caption: how these things work instead rather
Caption: than saying i need to know i need
Caption: to know sql
Caption: you want to learn about how these how
Caption: sql databases operate right so
Caption: at the lowest level they've got these
Caption: logs that they need to make durable and
Caption: from that they'll
Caption: kind of project some data out of it
Caption: with eventually consistent systems
Caption: you've got
Caption: distributive rights
Caption: and there is there's some work there
Caption: around gaining consensus around what
Caption: what data is there that kind of stuff so
Caption: my best advice
Caption: is to really focus on the concepts that
Caption: power these technologies don't focus on
Caption: the technologies themselves too much if
Caption: you do this well you can actually look
Caption: at what benefits a new product proposes
Caption: and say i reckon they did it this way
Caption: and if you're getting that right often
Caption: and if you're able to say i reckon
Caption: cockroach does things this way they said
Caption: they got these secret sauce but i reckon
Caption: it's something like this
Caption: if you can start looking at that level
Caption: you're really on the right track i think
Caption: thank you
Caption: another question yes t
Caption: you mentioned uh that tip if you have
Caption: how you go about start that discussion
Caption: with products how do you actually drive
Caption: that i think that was a great takeaway
Caption: for me yeah thank you
Caption: yeah um so that's a good question
Caption: it's
Caption: it depends on your organization a lot if
Caption: it's a very hierarchical one and you're
Caption: just getting tickets over the fence
Caption: it's a lot of work to go and
Caption: breach that gap but
Caption: i think
Caption: generally
Caption: you
Caption: just act in good faith for example if
Caption: you go
Caption: to a product person to someone who's a
Caption: real decision maker and you say hey
Caption: here's what i've been asked to build
Caption: i'd like to know what the problems are
Caption: trying to solve are and really
Caption: get some consensus on what we're trying
Caption: to deliver
Caption: i think most people will be very open to
Caption: that i think a lot of
Caption: non-engineering people would take to
Caption: that really kindly
Caption: i hope that answers i hope that answers
Caption: your question
Caption: okay
Caption: uh is that last question anymore
Caption: okay well i've got some good news uh
Caption: morning tea is uh served in the foyer
Caption: but a big thank you to nick
Caption: thanks everyone
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: first
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott hanselman's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: oh
Caption: [Music]
Caption: please
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero up what now auth zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep
Caption: think our customers are gonna love it i
Caption: got a real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: hi
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my
Caption: this office nerd's nerding what we're
Caption: doing is we're talking to people all
Caption: over the world because we're stuck in
Caption: our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join
Caption: someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering it
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and
Caption: i think that when they see when they see
Caption: the cereal box they say okay that's
Caption: carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge math nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pink beret
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very permanent accent
Caption: so the very completely makes sense as
Caption: for the being no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a big background with
Caption: hello kitty riding a unicorn it does not
Caption: reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of
Caption: sparks and enjoy and so yeah so being
Caption: better it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet and it's when people ask me how
Caption: to pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me so i'm better than
Caption: yesterday and i'll be better tomorrow i
Caption: also get a lot of training opportunities
Caption: and planning because there's a vast
Caption: library of training courses available
Caption: that i can just access anytime before i
Caption: join planet like when you want to learn
Caption: something google first right and then
Caption: when you google something you always
Caption: have to pay for something and that's not
Caption: that's not what i want to do so it's
Caption: really it's really good that planet
Caption: offers these free courses for me and i
Caption: don't have to feel pressured about
Caption: buying something just so i can improve
Caption: my skills and use them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top-notch
Caption: testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's
Caption: really cool to be around people who are
Caption: so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to want to learn and
Caption: get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top one is the best of the best and for
Caption: me it's
Caption: if you want to grow up in your carrier
Caption: you are at the right place because we
Caption: have got all the training materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: yeah whatever you need to progress in
Caption: your career you have got everything in
Caption: here
Caption: to boost your experience and boost your
Caption: personality everything
Caption: in a compact pack that's what planet is
Caption: for me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: uh
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott handsome
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made your dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best thing is you being back
Caption: by applying market leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services
Caption: mlq digital helps clients to fully
Caption: understand their i.t needs adopt the
Caption: right solution and provide ongoing
Caption: support to maximize their investment
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: excellent our next speaker is dylan
Caption: watson
Caption: he's going to talk to us today about
Caption: releasing your inner dev ops
Caption: dylan is a fan of cheap wine and fast
Caption: deployments
Caption: he has spent the last five years
Caption: improving the pace of development at
Caption: bankwest and has recently started with
Caption: alaskan building out their internal
Caption: continuous deployment platform
Caption: when he's not building out the latest
Caption: herebrain app idea he is playing on the
Caption: trampoline with his two kits welcome
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: all right cool
Caption: welcome guys
Caption: uh
Caption: so
Caption: basically today i want to talk about
Caption: how to build a culture of getting your
Caption: code
Caption: into production quickly safely
Caption: and
Caption: reliably
Caption: hey
Caption: thanks heaps all our sponsors um they've
Caption: yeah
Caption: without this
Caption: without them today you know wouldn't be
Caption: possible
Caption: okay so
Caption: first i want to start off with a bit of
Caption: audience participation
Caption: everyone loves
Caption: audience participation i'm sure
Caption: so
Caption: oh no
Caption: okay
Caption: try not to touch okay
Caption: so
Caption: if everyone could put up their hand if
Caption: your team has deployed something to
Caption: production this year
Caption: we'll start
Caption: ideally at low bar
Caption: so
Caption: keep your hand up
Caption: keep your hand up if you
Caption: your team deploys more often than every
Caption: six months
Caption: cool all right uh what about every month
Caption: a few few hands down but still pretty
Caption: good okay every week do you does your
Caption: team deploy every week
Caption: yep few less hands
Caption: what about every day
Caption: yep much much less hands
Caption: and what about every commit
Caption: all right cool there's there's a few
Caption: people uh awesome uh for the rest of you
Caption: it's definitely possible right
Caption: uh and today i'm going to show you a few
Caption: techniques that you can use
Caption: maybe not necessary to get there but to
Caption: improve your deployment process okay
Caption: uh
Caption: i'm dylan watson i love building useful
Caption: software uh and thinking about better
Caption: ways to get it into the hands of our
Caption: users
Caption: so first of all i'm gonna start off with
Caption: some guiding principles things to think
Caption: about in improving your
Caption: path to prod a little case study
Caption: recent project i've been working on
Caption: and some practical techniques that you
Caption: can use to
Caption: move your code into users hands quickly
Caption: um and safely
Caption: hopefully there's time for questions at
Caption: the end so
Caption: i am definitely keen to get into some
Caption: discussion if you guys um have got
Caption: our thoughts
Caption: there's going to be some controversial
Caption: stuff ahead
Caption: you won't agree with everything i'm sure
Caption: but that's cool uh as i said we can have
Caption: a chat afterwards
Caption: i will be
Caption: keen to have a discussion
Caption: so
Caption: first off deploying safe uh deploying
Caption: software safely uh it can be hard
Caption: hopefully that isn't the controversial
Caption: win
Caption: i'm sure we've all experienced pain
Caption: in deploying software
Caption: but it doesn't have to be that way
Caption: so
Caption: i'm sure that we've all got a time when
Caption: we've had a painful deployment to pride
Caption: maybe a late night or something so i
Caption: want you to think about what makes
Caption: deployments hard
Caption: does does anyone have anything that they
Caption: think like what what makes the
Caption: deployment hard
Caption: anyone have any ideas
Caption: feel free to shout out
Caption: yes late night deployments
Caption: gotta love them
Caption: anything else
Caption: oh testing
Caption: yes so manu manual testing uh is a huge
Caption: one for sure yep
Caption: um any anything else
Caption: cabs yes okay so approvals and stuff
Caption: like that um that's a huge one um so
Caption: things i think about uh might be
Caption: coordination between multiple teams okay
Caption: getting getting people to align is
Caption: always really difficult
Caption: scheduling out of hours deployments i'd
Caption: rather be at home with my family
Caption: batching weeks and weeks of changes is
Caption: super scary
Caption: you have no idea what you're sending
Caption: into production
Caption: okay
Caption: manual deployment so any any manual
Caption: steps in your process to production
Caption: really
Caption: that can make things really scary
Caption: they're likely to go wrong
Caption: you're going to mess something up no
Caption: matter how many times you've done it
Caption: and manual testing
Caption: discuss this as well it's it's
Caption: error-prone okay you want everything to
Caption: be automated in your pipeline as much as
Caption: possible
Caption: and once you actually get the thing into
Caption: production if something goes wrong and
Caption: you can't roll back to a safe state
Caption: easily
Caption: that's also really scary right so all
Caption: these things build up this fear in our
Caption: deployment process
Caption: hey on the other side of the coin what
Caption: makes deployments easy
Caption: does anyone have any ideas
Caption: sorry
Caption: yes yeah so less less changes going into
Caption: production right um
Caption: things like having your code always
Caption: ready to deploy
Caption: so
Caption: you've actually made all the you know
Caption: automated checks before you get to
Caption: production um before you even merge your
Caption: code
Caption: no approvals
Caption: no coordination
Caption: yes
Caption: automated
Caption: everything basically is probably going
Caption: to be the pattern of this talk
Caption: but yeah manual steps testing or
Caption: approvals
Caption: for sure
Caption: and you want to get to a point where
Caption: your deployments rarely fail
Caption: but most of that is about
Caption: is about
Caption: practice and automation
Caption: uh
Caption: so how do we do it
Caption: okay these are the things that i
Caption: i think are key
Caption: uh when we're improving our deployment
Caption: process
Caption: so
Caption: first of all
Caption: uh we'll start off with
Caption: uh i mean my talks release you into
Caption: devops right so
Caption: devops is really a mindset a mindset
Caption: about automating or removing the steps
Caption: in your process of deploying prod to
Caption: production and
Caption: being prepared to fail right so you're
Caption: trying things out
Caption: and
Caption: experimenting with your deployment
Caption: process and trying to just improve it
Caption: uh
Caption: back to fundamentals basically what
Caption: we're trying to do is write code
Caption: deploy it to production get it into the
Caption: hands of our users right that's that's
Caption: ultimately what we're doing here
Caption: so
Caption: we discussed before
Caption: uh small number of changes
Caption: less risk right so the smaller change
Caption: that you make
Caption: you might have
Caption: less risk of that failing but also when
Caption: it does fail when uh
Caption: you know exactly what broke right you
Caption: know that one little change you made
Caption: that was the issue you can roll it back
Caption: fix it okay it's isolated
Caption: you should only merge when it's safe for
Caption: production
Caption: so
Caption: uh
Caption: this is more of a
Caption: yeah again this is like a mindset thing
Caption: uh and
Caption: in order to check that we'll we'll go
Caption: through the techniques and stuff but we
Caption: want to merge and have all the automated
Caption: safety uh and know
Caption: that
Caption: this thing is as safe as possible to go
Caption: to production before you even merge that
Caption: code
Caption: testing is built into the pipeline okay
Caption: that's absolutely critical so automated
Caption: testing
Caption: um and there's you know
Caption: i could do a whole nother talk about the
Caption: types of testing but testing has to be
Caption: built into the pipeline
Caption: uh same with security okay so
Caption: it's that's just another aspect that we
Caption: have to consider when we're
Caption: um so so this is like your you know code
Caption: code scanning or vulnerability checking
Caption: all this sort of stuff needs to be
Caption: automated and will stop you from going
Caption: to production if these things break
Caption: and lastly once you actually get your
Caption: code into production you need to observe
Caption: what's happening right you need to know
Caption: so this is like your logging so
Caption: logging or
Caption: uh metrics and all this sort of stuff
Caption: you need to know exactly what's going on
Caption: in production so that when things do
Caption: break you can easily
Caption: track down the issue
Caption: and that you know that something is
Caption: broken in the first place
Caption: okay so
Caption: um i just want to chat a little bit
Caption: about um recent project i've been
Caption: working on uh
Caption: at bankwest uh
Caption: so
Caption: this is a home loan system with
Caption: uh depending how you cut their numbers
Caption: about uh 20 different components so apis
Caption: and apps
Caption: and
Caption: uh around about four teams
Caption: so
Caption: when we sort of started our
Caption: devops journey uh we're making about
Caption: five deployments per month okay uh
Caption: which is
Caption: is still not terrible but there's
Caption: there's also a few teams involved there
Caption: um
Caption: and
Caption: we increased to 55 deployments a month
Caption: at
Caption: a roundabout
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: uh on a global scale that's that's not a
Caption: huge amount but it but it made a big
Caption: difference to us right um that's the
Caption: order of magnitude difference
Caption: um so how
Caption: how do we do that
Caption: right
Caption: we were prepared to fail often
Caption: okay try things out uh we would have the
Caption: engineers in control of deployments
Caption: and
Caption: our definition of done was in production
Caption: so
Caption: yeah so experimenting and failing often
Caption: we made failure okay and even expected
Caption: often when we're trying things out
Caption: and because of this we tried lots of
Caption: things failure was cheap okay uh but we
Caption: also had the backing from our managers
Caption: to push and improve and make these
Caption: changes and
Caption: um
Caption: the expectation is that most of these
Caption: experience experiments failed but the
Caption: ones that worked they had a big impact
Caption: okay
Caption: another
Caption: so i think probably the biggest one for
Caption: me is that the engineers
Caption: were in control of the deployments so
Caption: when we started
Caption: uh the people doing deployments uh the
Caption: ops were
Caption: a totally different team
Caption: right they um they sat over there and
Caption: you would say oh i want i want a
Caption: deployment please and you'd have to
Caption: schedule it in
Caption: and
Caption: uh in order to alleviate a lot of the
Caption: pressure um
Caption: we we brought that person in so we
Caption: brought one of those ops people into our
Caption: team
Caption: okay and that made a huge difference for
Caption: us um because it meant that
Caption: all the people in the team we had all
Caption: the all the skills in the team to deploy
Caption: our code to production
Caption: from there that person trained the rest
Caption: of the team and we were able to work
Caption: together
Caption: engineers uh like dev and ops to
Caption: uh essentially
Caption: automate our pipeline to production
Caption: uh
Caption: so
Caption: uh to a point where anyone in the team
Caption: could
Caption: you know just click a button
Caption: so
Caption: um yeah essentially the
Caption: what's pretty common now the the build
Caption: it um you build it you run it concept
Caption: and lastly i think the
Caption: the fact that our definition of done is
Caption: a production right so you you can't
Caption: close the ticket that you're working on
Caption: until that thing is in the hands of your
Caption: users
Caption: and i think
Caption: um maybe it's a maybe it's a guilt thing
Caption: but um i think that's a it's a or even
Caption: just a visibility thing um
Caption: if if you don't close that particular
Caption: task until it's in production it doesn't
Caption: get forgotten about
Caption: and you know that when things start when
Caption: cards start to you know pile up uh
Caption: there's sort of a you can feel it here
Caption: that like you need to get that into
Caption: production that's that's a whole bunch
Caption: of features that your users are missing
Caption: out on
Caption: okay so
Caption: now i want to share some techniques
Caption: i now want to share some techniques
Caption: that help to deploy regularly and safely
Caption: so
Caption: first of all
Caption: we want to separate our deployments and
Caption: our releases
Caption: we want to use feature toggles
Caption: and
Caption: a little thing called expand rollout
Caption: contract
Caption: which is a really great technique
Caption: some of you probably have used it
Caption: without knowing the name
Caption: but basically all these things are about
Caption: taking a
Caption: considered measured approach okay to our
Caption: deployments
Caption: so yeah deployments and releases so
Caption: first of all
Caption: uh more audience participation
Caption: uh who who dreads deployments
Caption: i i suspect
Caption: anyone that deploys more off uh less
Caption: less often than a month probably is
Caption: having these thoughts
Caption: um
Caption: okay and what about who who dreads
Caption: releases
Caption: okay
Caption: have a little thing
Caption: now
Caption: who thinks i asked the same question
Caption: twice
Caption: that's that's valid okay um
Caption: but uh basically i
Caption: i'm here to basically separate those two
Caption: concepts okay so first of all we'll
Caption: start with some some definitions so
Caption: deployments are basically
Caption: um
Caption: in my eyes moving your code into a
Caption: production environment
Caption: okay ideally there's zero downtime so
Caption: you're using some sort of deployment
Caption: strategy
Caption: like
Caption: green blue deploy or something like that
Caption: but ultimately there is no there is no
Caption: downtime in your system
Caption: and it should be a
Caption: low risk to the business it's a
Caption: technical exercise we're just moving
Caption: some code
Caption: into a production environment
Caption: okay
Caption: and
Caption: with automation it should happen with
Caption: minimal human interaction
Caption: it also shouldn't be affecting our users
Caption: um is a is a pretty cool pretty cool
Caption: pretty critical one um there's zero time
Caption: downtime but there shouldn't really be
Caption: any impact to our users
Caption: on a release on the other hand um
Caption: now
Caption: obviously we had some people that uh
Caption: uh
Caption: thought i was asking the same question
Caption: really deployments and releases that's
Caption: like they're pretty ambiguous terms i
Caption: think i think release is a pretty
Caption: ambiguous term um it's used for all
Caption: sorts of things
Caption: generally i'll probably use the word
Caption: launch right
Caption: so
Caption: i'll go i'll go through in a sec but
Caption: a release or a launch is basically about
Caption: launching new functionality to a user
Caption: and maybe maybe you're only launching to
Caption: some set of users right you're only
Caption: activating the code for for certain
Caption: users
Caption: and
Caption: the fact that we're separating
Caption: deployments and releases allows us to
Caption: premiere prepare time for
Caption: comms or train our users or let them
Caption: know that something is something new is
Caption: coming okay it's not going to be like a
Caption: new facebook release and everyone goes
Caption: oh
Caption: it's totally changed okay um we don't
Caption: want to end up in that situation
Caption: um okay so who cares
Caption: deployments
Caption: the team should care right the team
Caption: doing the work is sending that code into
Caption: production
Caption: and and they care when things break
Caption: okay releases
Caption: we're trying to
Caption: um we're trying to give the user new
Caption: functionality so the user should care
Caption: okay
Caption: um and i think that
Caption: that's what we should be thinking about
Caption: when we're separating okay so anyway how
Caption: do we separate these two things
Caption: basically we're trying to deploy a bunch
Caption: of times
Caption: [Music]
Caption: and
Caption: eventually
Caption: release
Caption: so
Caption: okay
Caption: uh basically
Caption: uh
Caption: the
Caption: there's a bunch of different ways you
Caption: can do it but the biggest one um i'm
Caption: sure a bunch of you will know feature
Caption: toggles are other way to do this okay
Caption: so
Caption: for those unsure this is a feature
Caption: toggle okay it's essentially just
Caption: something wrapping our code um
Caption: a
Caption: you know an if block that says if this
Caption: new feature is on for some specific user
Caption: um
Caption: and you know this thing could be tight
Caption: entirely broken underneath
Caption: ideally it's not but
Caption: the the block allows us to test
Caption: test this out test out this new feature
Caption: without affecting other users
Caption: so
Caption: with feature toggles we can
Caption: deploy our changes
Caption: and they will be inactive okay so they
Caption: won't affect our users
Caption: they can be slowly rolled out to certain
Caption: users
Caption: and
Caption: basically they allow
Caption: features to be merged
Caption: and you know built out without affecting
Caption: other teams as well so other teams
Caption: working in the same on the same
Caption: component in the same area aren't
Caption: affected by
Caption: your
Caption: um
Caption: your work
Caption: okay your potentially broken new feature
Caption: the other dark side of this to toggles
Caption: um some of you might have heard about
Caption: the
Caption: night capital recently um
Caption: that basically didn't forgot to clean up
Caption: a particular toggle and they
Caption: reused the same toggle name and it
Caption: causes cause them to lose millions of
Caption: dollars so
Caption: the critical part of using feature
Caption: toggles is to clean them up afterwards
Caption: okay
Caption: so
Caption: my rule of thumb is
Caption: uh basically once it's on
Caption: and you've
Caption: proven that it's uh
Caption: that it's not going to break uh you then
Caption: remove it right
Caption: it sounds obvious but it's it's
Caption: something that it's often gets forgotten
Caption: about
Caption: but once you turn it on you remove it
Caption: okay maybe a week or whatever but you
Caption: remove it almost straight away
Caption: so
Caption: in terms of the process
Caption: we might introduce a new feature with
Caption: you know
Caption: if this new feature is on for some
Caption: internal user
Caption: so we turn it on for internal users to
Caption: begin with
Caption: and
Caption: we can start building out this feature
Caption: so we add some more new shiny feature
Caption: maybe a bug fix okay because our users
Caption: have been using it um into our internal
Caption: users um
Caption: we've been you know dog fooding this
Caption: this particular feature and we fixed
Caption: some bugs okay
Caption: after that we start turning it on for
Caption: some specific set of customers okay
Caption: and
Caption: you know maybe we make a few more bug
Caption: fixes but we're only affecting a small
Caption: subset of users
Caption: and then finally we turn it on for
Caption: everyone
Caption: okay
Caption: as soon as that happens
Caption: we remove the code remove the feature uh
Caption: feature toggle and
Caption: everyone has the shiny new feature
Caption: so
Caption: okay so that's about introducing new
Caption: functionality
Caption: when we want to introduce
Caption: say
Caption: a new
Caption: a new field or a new endpoint for our um
Caption: api we use a technique called expand
Caption: rollout contract okay this allows us to
Caption: make um
Caption: basically breaking changes in a in a
Caption: considered manner
Caption: so um yeah expand roll out contract i'll
Caption: go through it in a sec so
Caption: um
Caption: some more code
Caption: hopefully it's simple enough
Caption: but basically we've got a user they've
Caption: got a name field a surname field
Caption: and some usage of that field
Caption: so
Caption: we think well actually the name field
Caption: really should be
Caption: first name okay we want to rename this
Caption: field
Caption: so the first thing to do is we expand
Caption: okay so we add our first name field
Caption: no one really uses it we've added the
Caption: field
Caption: we deploy that to prod
Caption: and then we want to start we've got this
Caption: new field we want to start using it so
Caption: we make a change
Caption: we start everyone starts to use this
Caption: field okay
Caption: there might be if it's an api there
Caption: might be multiple other apis consuming
Caption: this particular field okay everyone
Caption: updates to use this new field
Caption: we deploy the prod
Caption: after that
Caption: uh
Caption: so that's so that's rolling out your
Caption: change right after that you want to
Caption: start to contract
Caption: so once you've proven
Caption: proven that everyone has stopped using
Caption: that particular field
Caption: you then contract and you remove the now
Caption: defunct unused field okay so this is
Caption: a
Caption: measured form of deprecating a
Caption: particular field
Caption: so we remove our name field that's no
Caption: longer used and
Caption: we go about our lives
Caption: after deploying right
Caption: so yeah expand role that contract so
Caption: this technique is really useful for
Caption: api changes okay might be fields might
Caption: be endpoints but it's also really useful
Caption: for database changes you can do the same
Caption: thing
Caption: and
Caption: like library changes
Caption: library changes potentially
Caption: a bit harder to track down usages but
Caption: yeah if if you can if you can understand
Caption: your users of your library then this
Caption: works just perfectly
Caption: um
Caption: okay obviously
Caption: always deployed a problem
Caption: so
Caption: what given everything now what does an
Caption: ideal deploy process look like
Caption: so we've got
Caption: automated tests and security scanning
Caption: we've got an automated deployment
Caption: process
Caption: okay and
Caption: it's really quick to roll back
Caption: and it's really quick to get back into a
Caption: safe state when things go wrong
Caption: our
Caption: changes are toggled so when we deploy
Caption: them
Caption: they have no user impact initially until
Caption: we're ready okay until our users are
Caption: ready until we've tested that feature
Caption: and we're happy
Caption: and that means that we minimize the
Caption: number of approvals required
Caption: after you've merged your code
Caption: you can have as much process as you want
Caption: before you merge your code as much as
Caption: you need but ideally after you've merged
Caption: that code you should be ready to go to
Caption: production
Caption: and
Caption: it's all automated
Caption: and our changes are backwards compatible
Caption: okay we're using expand span rollout
Caption: contract
Caption: or
Caption: some feature toggling mechanism
Caption: and so we minimize the coordination that
Caption: we need between teams
Caption: because we're not breaking other people
Caption: and we're doing this all the time so
Caption: it's proven
Caption: and our deployments
Caption: deployment failures are rare um
Caption: they they happen but we have
Caption: we have a rollback procedure and
Caption: everything works smoothly
Caption: okay so
Caption: deploying at speed
Caption: is not a leap of faith okay you don't
Caption: just throw stuff into production and
Caption: just cross your fingers and hope right
Caption: it's
Caption: having that safety removes the fear
Caption: okay and that safety
Caption: allows us to deploy at
Caption: speed
Caption: that's it thank you
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: um so i think i assume we've got heaps
Caption: of time for questions
Caption: so
Caption: yeah thank you very much still um now
Caption: i'm going to open up the floor for a q a
Caption: session uh has anyone got any questions
Caption: for them
Caption: oh we just got one down the back first
Caption: um
Caption: i guess being sort of still new um to
Caption: developing whatever just wondering what
Caption: these type of manual deployment
Caption: processes kind of look like if they're
Caption: like that much of a pain
Caption: um
Caption: what do manual deployment processes look
Caption: like um
Caption: i guess
Caption: i don't know it could look it's
Caption: different in every every company uh so
Caption: i guess i'm thinking about uh
Caption: you know maybe the old days where you're
Caption: ftping your files onto a php server or
Caption: something and then
Caption: or like
Caption: manually copying your
Caption: you know war file onto a server that's
Caption: like a pet server that you keep alive um
Caption: you know specifically and you don't you
Caption: know create new ones all the time you
Caption: know like it's not basically
Caption: um
Caption: because that machine is uh you know set
Caption: up by some person um somewhere five
Caption: years ago that has since left the
Caption: company so you you're
Caption: you're looking at you know setting up um
Caption: vms uh via code and basically all the
Caption: pieces of infrastructure that you need
Caption: are set up by a code that's that's the
Caption: automated like way i know that's sort of
Caption: very vague but it is totally different
Caption: in every it depends what you're
Caption: deploying
Caption: cool
Caption: next question
Caption: um i guess this depends a lot on
Caption: we're talking about client side or
Caption: so but how do you prove
Caption: that
Caption: you know your expand contract for
Caption: example how do you prove
Caption: that say a property
Caption: an external
Caption: api yeah yes yeah so i guess you're so
Caption: very internal i mean within an
Caption: organization but so within
Caption: within an organization
Caption: it's uh
Caption: ideally much easier um
Caption: uh so
Caption: like there's there's plenty of tools out
Caption: there like um
Caption: ideally your organization's got some
Caption: sort of code repository and everyone can
Caption: see that the usage of that code you know
Caption: uh you should be able to know the
Caption: dependencies of each of the systems so
Caption: um
Caption: i guess i'm thinking about um like
Caption: library like client libraries so um
Caption: so if you're talking between apis
Caption: an api might
Caption: output some sort of client library and
Caption: so you know that know the people that
Caption: depend on that client library so you can
Caption: check
Caption: those usages
Caption: external is a much harder is a much
Caption: harder thing it's essentially a
Caption: library right so you have to
Caption: you have to deprecate fields and give
Caption: comms to that and
Caption: wait a lot more time
Caption: that that becomes a much harder deal but
Caption: internally
Caption: this stuff is
Caption: it shouldn't be hard
Caption: it is for all sorts of reasons but it
Caption: shouldn't be hard and you can you can
Caption: make great strides internally at least
Caption: um
Caption: i think
Caption: i feel like that was super vague but
Caption: yeah
Caption: there's definitely tools out there
Caption: it's turned off there we go there we go
Caption: it's just gonna expand on that question
Caption: so a few years ago i had a bit of
Caption: experience working with you um and here
Caption: we go
Caption: [Laughter]
Caption: it was an awesome experience but um i
Caption: love the expand rollout contract but
Caption: adding to that question we experimented
Caption: with like consumer driven
Caption: contract testing yeah but it never
Caption: really seemed to take hold it never
Caption: really seemed to um like work and i was
Caption: just wondering where did it land like um
Caption: did you get it working or did you find
Caption: other ways uh so so i have seen other
Caption: implementations that worked
Caption: but we ended up ripping it out
Caption: and going for as i was sort of talking
Caption: about before having
Caption: a client
Caption: so each api would spit out a client
Caption: library and
Caption: for either like back-end services so
Caption: like java
Caption: or front-end as well
Caption: and the key to that is also that
Caption: so we would
Caption: so we had a lot of issues early days
Caption: where we would make backwards
Caption: incompatible changes so we would just
Caption: sort of forget about consumers and break
Caption: them
Caption: thinking that contract testing was going
Caption: to help us
Caption: so
Caption: we ended up writing
Caption: um
Caption: and there's again there's plenty of
Caption: tools out there that sort of check your
Caption: swagger and fail your build when you
Caption: make backwards into incompatible changes
Caption: that's not to say that you that you
Caption: can't make them but you have to do it in
Caption: a measured way so you don't make them
Caption: unless you have sort of proven and sort
Caption: of gone through all your you know
Caption: git repos and checked that
Caption: the other consumers are not using that
Caption: field or that endpoint anymore
Caption: and
Caption: and that's usually just a case of
Caption: a search um
Caption: but but yeah first of all you don't make
Caption: those backwards incompatible changes
Caption: by default at least
Caption: cool thank you
Caption: uh yeah about feature toggling so i've
Caption: seen feature talking uh fail terribly
Caption: thankfully not because of me but of some
Caption: people and i was a
Caption: a very fortunate spectator about it so
Caption: so i've seen it fail many times even
Caption: though i were i was perfectly capable of
Caption: doing so uh also my project my question
Caption: is that um do you think picture toggling
Caption: is more of an engineering thing than a
Caption: devops thingy
Caption: um
Caption: so so i have devops in my talk title but
Caption: i think
Caption: i think the concept of having it
Caption: so first of all i think the concept of
Caption: having
Caption: devops as a as a role or something feels
Caption: like it's defeating the purpose of
Caption: devops
Caption: um but uh
Caption: i guess
Caption: uh
Caption: i think i've lost track of what i was
Caption: thinking what was your ask ask a
Caption: question again sorry
Caption: yeah okay so so that's i guess my
Caption: thought is
Caption: it should there's there's no distinction
Caption: for me
Caption: um
Caption: engineering
Caption: engineers at the like the whole point of
Caption: devops is that you've just got
Caption: smart people doing like
Caption: work
Caption: um
Caption: right
Caption: ideally right
Caption: so so
Caption: so the the point of devops is like that
Caption: you're you're bringing in all these um
Caption: people and working together so i mean
Caption: maybe it's not one person maybe it's one
Caption: team but um
Caption: but distinguishing between
Caption: like actually
Caption: uh having a specific role for devops
Caption: doesn't make sense to me because you're
Caption: just
Caption: a team of people working towards
Caption: improving
Caption: yeah hey hey dylan um yeah my question
Caption: is also about feature toggling so i've
Caption: seen you know teams losing track
Caption: of the toggles not cleaning up um
Caption: did you have any kind of tooling um in
Caption: place or also you kind of presented to
Caption: maybe the business and look that's
Caption: that's in production
Caption: now we we turn it on and then we clean
Caption: it up it's kind because let's say four
Caption: teams 20 components yeah you might lose
Caption: it yeah yeah so so that was a that's a
Caption: big thing for us so
Caption: um
Caption: so
Caption: bankwest were using um sort of uh
Caption: i would say
Caption: like internal tools for for the
Caption: feature doggles and also managing them
Caption: but we
Caption: we definitely had visibility of what
Caption: toggles each team owned
Caption: how long they'd been
Caption: turned on
Caption: the state of them in each of our
Caption: environments um so we had full
Caption: visibility and you know
Caption: i don't know it seems silly but like if
Caption: they got too old they would go that
Caption: would go red right we would know that
Caption: this thing is getting old um there was
Caption: like a
Caption: it has to be a conscious decision to
Caption: keep that thing around because it's like
Caption: in your face um and
Caption: like
Caption: uh you know that was all custom stuff
Caption: but like tools like launch darkly and
Caption: stuff um which are the
Caption: popular popular ones in the um you know
Caption: outside world uh
Caption: they they have all this stuff like you
Caption: can see how old toggles are and um you
Caption: know we basically wouldn't start work um
Caption: or wouldn't be able to deliver our new
Caption: feature until we got rid of the old
Caption: feature toggles um so
Caption: like
Caption: yeah i mean that's a bit of process but
Caption: like you have to have that
Caption: ability to you know something to audit
Caption: like removing stuff
Caption: otherwise i just forget yet it's
Caption: forgotten about
Caption: um where then dylan um you can have the
Caption: speed up in your deployment but as a
Caption: consumer of the database and i did a lot
Caption: of analytics
Caption: and machine learning and in your example
Caption: you change the field name
Caption: that will break my code
Caption: how you
Caption: make my life easy as well yeah right so
Caption: so
Caption: um i guess that's why that's why you're
Caption: taking the measured approach of uh not
Caption: renaming it's so there's no such thing
Caption: as a rename basically um there's there's
Caption: a an add and a remove but it's a
Caption: considered step so um in the case of say
Caption: a database you would be adding a column
Caption: and populating both columns okay and no
Caption: one's using that other column
Caption: you would migrate the data into that
Caption: other column maybe as a second step
Caption: only once
Caption: both columns are sort of working in
Caption: tandem then you can switch over to
Caption: actually using that new column so then
Caption: that would be at the point that you
Caption: would start to use that new column and
Caption: once we've proven that you're actually
Caption: using it and so is everyone else
Caption: then we can drop that the other column
Caption: that would be the approach
Caption: thank you
Caption: hello
Caption: um
Caption: for testing um
Caption: when do you use a load balancer and
Caption: to divert some of your traffic to
Caption: the new feature and roll it out slowly
Caption: rather than use feature request
Caption: um
Caption: so that's
Caption: to be honest not something i have really
Caption: ever tried um
Caption: it's
Caption: uh
Caption: i'm sure it's a valid approach but
Caption: most of the stuff that i have done is
Caption: more about um
Caption: you would deploy um
Caption: so i guess that's more about like uh
Caption: uh
Caption: what's it called like
Caption: like share it like basically shadowing
Caption: requests to some sort of um to some sort
Caption: of system before you take it and make it
Caption: live um but
Caption: yeah i i don't have experience
Caption: personally most of it uh most of the
Caption: things that i do is like you actually
Caption: deploy the thing into production um and
Caption: the code isn't active so so you actually
Caption: you're not really having two versions
Caption: running at once you're just switching
Caption: over and then you can
Caption: control
Caption: uh turn on some toggle or some toggle
Caption: for specific users yeah it's more about
Caption: that that's easier to reason about in my
Caption: head
Caption: um so i guess it's pretty much
Caption: down to the concept that we're deploying
Caption: with a high level of frequency
Caption: which implies to me that
Caption: we're more prone to
Caption: put bugs into the production environment
Caption: although i understand that it's probably
Caption: with a smaller user base
Caption: how do you
Caption: rash rationalize that like is is it just
Caption: subjective do you go oh these users are
Caption: prepared to cop it so it's okay or
Caption: what's going on there yeah yeah okay so
Caption: i totally get that so we're so releasing
Caption: more often uh more likely that code is
Caption: less ready um and
Caption: getting into the hands of our users
Caption: right so so the key thing is that um
Caption: ideally we're ex
Caption: so
Caption: with feature toggles you're exposing
Caption: less of your users um so you're maybe
Caption: only exposing your team initially right
Caption: and i know that's hard for depending on
Caption: your system um
Caption: because some
Caption: depending on your system your your users
Caption: are um
Caption: like your team is not really able to dog
Caption: food your your app right um
Caption: particularly in the case of bankwest
Caption: where um like how
Caption: my team wasn't applying for a home loan
Caption: every week
Caption: um
Caption: so so but we've got other environments
Caption: where we do that right where we might
Caption: turn on in that particular environment
Caption: we might turn on
Caption: just for my team until until we're
Caption: really happy so we're not even affecting
Caption: other teams we're just affecting my team
Caption: okay the team that's actually building
Caption: out that functionality
Caption: um
Caption: it's it's definitely a
Caption: risk um but i would trade it off with
Caption: the fact that if you're
Caption: bulking up you know two months of
Caption: changes and sending that into production
Caption: and that breaks like
Caption: well what went wrong
Caption: two months of work i have to sift
Caption: through two months of work to figure out
Caption: what the hell went wrong that's going to
Caption: take me much longer
Caption: than
Caption: say that one thing that i said i guess
Caption: just to add to that so
Caption: it is it seems like it is kind of
Caption: subjective we haven't necessarily been
Caption: able to quantify doing this way has less
Caption: impact than doing the other way it just
Caption: like
Caption: seems that way because we're not as
Caption: stressed in the
Caption: yeah it's large releases of deployments
Caption: yeah um
Caption: but
Caption: yeah i i don't have no for sure i don't
Caption: i don't have i don't have numbers um but
Caption: i
Caption: uh
Caption: i guess
Caption: uh i guess i've definitely seen the
Caption: alternative um so from my experience um
Caption: i've seen deployments go wrong and go go
Caption: wrong catastrophically
Caption: way more
Caption: when you're deploying you know monthly
Caption: or whatever yes it seems like that the
Caption: impact will be less with
Caption: a higher frequency of deployment even if
Caption: there are more bugs then yeah it's
Caption: damaging so maybe that's okay and it's
Caption: and it's way less stress as a developer
Caption: which ideally uh also in turn
Caption: makes for less bugs but for sure i don't
Caption: have numbers no thanks
Caption: oh great um
Caption: so i also i work at a bank i work for up
Caption: which is now owned by bendigo so we we
Caption: ship six to ten times a day but bendigo
Caption: might ship
Caption: once every few months um
Caption: were there any things you had to do
Caption: to bring the other teams within the bank
Caption: along this journey to allow you to
Caption: to ship multiple times a day and release
Caption: more frequently thinking like
Caption: risk teams and those yeah
Caption: yeah so that's definitely um
Caption: that's definitely a hard one right um
Caption: and i think
Caption: uh
Caption: what made it possible at least um at
Caption: bankwest was uh
Caption: the setup of the team so so again when
Caption: when these things arise say four
Caption: deployments we we brought in our system
Caption: engineers into the team um so actually
Caption: having
Caption: like bringing the critical people um on
Caption: the path like
Caption: critical expertise bringing them
Caption: actually into our our teams even
Caption: or our you know our project sphere
Caption: whatever you want to call it um but
Caption: actually bringing them in so so their
Caption: goals are your goals um
Caption: it's like it's not an easy problem for
Caption: sure um there's a lot of different
Caption: disciplines that need to be involved but
Caption: ideally where you can bring them in and
Caption: so you're both heading in that same
Caption: direction um
Caption: yeah that's is that something to do with
Caption: your methodology as well like being
Caption: truly agile as well and having that
Caption: framework across the organization to
Caption: accept continuous
Caption: development
Caption: yeah i think that's
Caption: like all this stuff is a is a constant
Caption: um
Caption: well you constantly hit up against these
Caption: sort of problems but also you're
Caption: constantly trying to improve
Caption: and you know any organization is not
Caption: going to be um
Caption: homogenous right it's that
Caption: all different areas are going to be
Caption: totally different and work in totally
Caption: different ways but um yeah i think if
Caption: you can somehow align on like what
Caption: you're trying to achieve
Caption: that's that's how you get that done
Caption: very good
Caption: all right well thank you very much
Caption: that's a great presentation
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: so how often
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me yeah
Caption: yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott hanselman
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: first
Caption: like
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott hanselman
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: grown from a small technology provider
Caption: founded by two young brothers to a
Caption: fortune 500 company offering i.t
Caption: services and solutions for all
Caption: for more than 30 years people have
Caption: trusted us to turn ambitious projects
Caption: into meaningful outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and
Caption: i think that when they see when they see
Caption: the cereal box they say okay that's
Caption: carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge
Caption: math nerd
Caption: all right hello everyone uh normally i'd
Caption: like to be in the crowd a bit more but
Caption: i've been told because of the banner and
Caption: the microphone i have to stay behind the
Caption: lectern
Caption: i'm karen larry i'm talking about their
Caption: people not users
Caption: the only thing i really really need to
Caption: know about me for this talk is on the
Caption: main slide and that's i'm a graphic
Caption: design lecturer i currently teach
Caption: sessionally at murdoch university a
Caption: teaching in the graphic design degree so
Caption: if you do have graduates come through
Caption: that don't know what they're talking
Caption: about that's probably my fault
Caption: so i'm just going to give a shout out to
Caption: all the sponsors that make today
Caption: possible as well as all the volunteers
Caption: and the committee members who are giving
Caption: their time to put together this great
Caption: conference for us
Caption: so today what i want to talk about is
Caption: human centered design and this is a term
Caption: that's actually coined by don norman don
Caption: norman wrote a really great book called
Caption: the design of everyday things that i
Caption: highly recommend
Caption: and he says the goal is to produce a
Caption: great product one that is successful and
Caption: that customers love it can be done so
Caption: this is all about empathy which is
Caption: something that we are familiar with many
Caption: from uh ux design
Caption: and we're looking here at putting people
Caption: first we're looking past the visuals but
Caption: unlike what we see in ux design we're
Caption: actually also looking past the
Caption: functionality to focus on the thoughts
Caption: and the feelings of the people who are
Caption: using your app and your product
Caption: so how do we do that
Caption: well most of the time we'd start with a
Caption: persona so let's meet ben
Caption: ben is a software developer here in
Caption: perth he's married he doesn't have any
Caption: kids he's got terrible taste in music
Caption: and he enjoys rock climbing and running
Caption: as his two main hobbies
Caption: once we've written our persona we might
Caption: make some scenarios
Caption: and chances are once we've written those
Caption: scenarios the language that we use to
Caption: talk about band changes
Caption: we might find we start using words like
Caption: user like visitor click subscriber
Caption: traffic customer the language goes on
Caption: these words
Caption: are actually quite problematic because
Caption: they focus themselves on the role of the
Caption: user when they're using your product
Caption: we assign a role to them based on that
Caption: interaction and based on how we intend
Caption: to profit from them
Caption: don norman who i mentioned coined the
Caption: term human experience design is actually
Caption: the one who coined the term user
Caption: experience design
Caption: and he developed what we call human
Caption: sensor design because he also thought
Caption: these words were quite problematic
Caption: because ben is none of those things
Caption: ben's a person
Caption: so the first thing that we really need
Caption: to be doing here is changing our
Caption: terminology and calling our audience
Caption: people
Caption: they're not users they're not visitors
Caption: and they're not clicks
Caption: this is a really small change that we
Caption: can be making in our internal documents
Caption: in our company but it actually allows us
Caption: to refocus our team on what's important
Caption: and that's this big messy
Caption: complicated experience that we call
Caption: being human and the fact that your app's
Caption: only one small part of that
Caption: because let's face it being human is
Caption: complicated just look at ben
Caption: ben screws up a lot
Caption: do you really think you can account for
Caption: all of the different ways ben manages to
Caption: screw up on an almost daily basis
Caption: ben is lazy
Caption: ben doesn't like having to get up in the
Caption: mornings he'll often leave for work at
Caption: the last possible moment
Caption: he's unpredictable not even his wife can
Caption: sometimes predict some of the behavior
Caption: that he manages and the decisions that
Caption: he makes he's very complex like most of
Caption: us ben will often believe in
Caption: contradictory things at the same time
Caption: and getting very heated arguments about
Caption: them
Caption: ben also wastes a lot of time he'll
Caption: spend a lot of time on his phone
Caption: browsing reddit
Caption: a lot of time watching tv
Caption: when we use language like visitor like
Caption: user we are suggesting that there's a
Caption: such thing as an ideal user for our app
Caption: and there is no ideal user that doesn't
Caption: exist we don't know the situation ben's
Caption: going to be in when he uses our app we
Caption: don't know the environment
Caption: we don't know how he's going to be
Caption: thinking of feeling
Caption: so we really need to be thinking about
Caption: how we can change this terminology and
Caption: think of ben as being human because if
Caption: we don't do this ben's going to find our
Caption: app really frustrating to use
Caption: and when ben gets frustrated when he
Caption: does screw up
Caption: it's not ben's fault ben's very good at
Caption: blaming other people
Caption: it'll always be your fault as the
Caption: designer
Caption: a way around this as i tell my students
Caption: when i'm teaching is to ask why
Caption: you want to ask why five times is a
Caption: guide that i give my students and we do
Caption: this because human error is never the
Caption: answer
Caption: if the answer you've come up with is
Caption: that it's ben's fault you have to keep
Caption: digging because ben will not accept the
Caption: blame
Caption: you need to look beyond the feature that
Caption: ben's gotten stuck at and look at the
Caption: problem with the system itself
Caption: because
Caption: ben cares about a lot more than your
Caption: product
Caption: so we need to look beyond the product
Caption: itself beyond the features that you've
Caption: developed
Caption: ben himself he cares about climate
Caption: change he's quite concerned about the
Caption: world he's very aware given he's a
Caption: developer about how his data is being
Caption: used and about the kinds of permissions
Caption: that he's granting the apps that he uses
Caption: ben's much less likely to use your app
Caption: if it's not ethical now i'm going to put
Caption: a little asterisk here because human
Caption: centered design doesn't have to be
Caption: ethical and we see plenty of examples
Caption: that aren't
Caption: but human centered design is about
Caption: focusing on the experience and creating
Caption: a positive experience for people using
Caption: your app so it should always be ethical
Caption: and when we're talking about ethics what
Caption: we're really talking about
Caption: is the respect that you have for your
Caption: users people are more aware now than
Caption: ever before
Caption: thanks to shows like the social dilemma
Caption: on netflix about the social
Caption: responsibility the people making their
Caption: media should have
Caption: so the very first element we need to
Caption: consider when we're talking about ethics
Caption: is human rights
Caption: making sure that you protect the
Caption: fundamental human rights that your app
Caption: has
Caption: so we're looking here about your social
Caption: responsibility at the very core
Caption: you want to make sure your app is
Caption: transparent
Caption: accessible and sustainable so you don't
Caption: want to deceive users
Caption: a really good example of this is the
Caption: twitter bluetick
Caption: when we see a blue tick on twitter we
Caption: often see it as holding some kind of
Caption: power
Caption: we see it as representing a status
Caption: symbol of power and recognition no one
Caption: has really exemplified this more than
Caption: the way people have reacted to donald
Caption: trump on twitter before he got banned
Caption: the blue tick actually just
Caption: recognizes a high profile user it stops
Caption: other people from impersonating them
Caption: that's all that does but the decision
Caption: that twitter made to use a tick as a
Caption: symbol
Caption: very much changes the reaction we have
Caption: as an audience to that symbol
Caption: we want to also be transparent in
Caption: an upfront about the purchases people
Caption: might need to make in our products
Caption: we know we've all heard of micro
Caption: transactions ea games made the news a
Caption: few years ago 2018 2017 over micro
Caption: transactions
Caption: the micro transaction industry is still
Caption: massive
Caption: in 2021 it was worth 60 billion dollars
Caption: so there is definitely a lot of money to
Caption: be made here but is it ethical ea games
Caption: had developed what they called loot
Caption: boxes as a way to advance faster in
Caption: their games we saw belgium in 2018
Caption: banned these loot boxes as a form of
Caption: gambling that actually got overturned
Caption: briefly and it got overturned because
Caption: the actual legislation that defined what
Caption: gambling is didn't cover this form of
Caption: in-game purchases in apps
Caption: but while the law wasn't really up to
Caption: speed and still is in many countries
Caption: around our use of microtransactions
Caption: it doesn't make it ethical do we really
Caption: want our kids and our teens in these
Caption: apps potentially with your credit card
Caption: making these uh purchases and learning
Caption: from a really young age to gamble rather
Caption: than putting in the effort for gameplay
Caption: your product should also aim to reduce
Caption: inequality which is a really important
Caption: aspect of human rights this comes down
Caption: to learnability thinking about how easy
Caption: it is for first-time users
Caption: and also that dreaded word that i'm sure
Caption: we all find frustrated with at times
Caption: compatibility
Caption: making sure it works backwards across
Caption: different devices
Caption: our next element is respecting human
Caption: effort so your app should be functional
Caption: it should also be trustworthy and
Caption: reliable you want to respect the effort
Caption: that we're actually putting into using
Caption: your app
Caption: so you want to respect privacy here you
Caption: want to only collect information from
Caption: your from the people that are using your
Caption: app that's absolutely necessary to be
Caption: using it we are more aware than ever as
Caption: i said about the kinds of permissions
Caption: that we're granting when we use apps
Caption: you also want to think about the extents
Caption: to which you as a designer or a
Caption: developer are actually going to
Caption: influence the behavior of the people who
Caption: use your app a really good example from
Caption: of this comes from a book called stolen
Caption: focus by johann hari this book looks at
Caption: the different ways that our attention
Caption: spans have actually reduced and it just
Caption: looks at ways beyond just technology and
Caption: beyond social media but it does have
Caption: understandably quite a few chapters
Caption: about social media and in it johan talks
Caption: about the creator of the scroll feat
Caption: and says that the creator of the scroll
Caption: feed actually deeply regretted his
Caption: decision and being a part of this
Caption: creation
Caption: and it did what it was supposed to it
Caption: allowed kept people on on the app it
Caption: kept people there for longer allowing
Caption: them to collect more data sell more ads
Caption: and make more money
Caption: but it didn't respect effort that people
Caption: were putting into being in that app
Caption: we compare this to netflix
Caption: netflix after you've watched a few
Caption: episodes gives you a notification asking
Caption: if you're still there it is thanks to
Caption: this notification that ben makes it to
Caption: bed on time at night
Caption: so the last aspect we've got is where we
Caption: really see this link with human centered
Caption: design and that's creating positive
Caption: experiences
Caption: this is about the emotional connection
Caption: people have with your product it should
Caption: be delightful it should be intuitive and
Caption: it should be invisible
Caption: if your app works well
Caption: i shouldn't notice the interactions i'm
Caption: having in it it should be that easy to
Caption: use if i'm having to think about it
Caption: you've done something wrong
Caption: now we can't consider ethics without
Caption: also considering the wider community
Caption: because ben is part of the bigger
Caption: community
Caption: our design has to focus on the entire
Caption: activity under consideration not just
Caption: the smaller components you have and this
Caption: is a reason why we all have terms like
Caption: feature creep in our terminology
Caption: ben is part of a much bigger system than
Caption: your app he's part of the software
Caption: community here in wa and in australia
Caption: we need to be sensitive to the history
Caption: and the culture and the beliefs of the
Caption: structures and the community that we're
Caption: designing for and you can't do this on
Caption: your own
Caption: even if you have a team of people whose
Caption: job this is you cannot do this on your
Caption: own you need to be talking to the
Caption: community that are going to be involved
Caption: in your app
Caption: which means you can't just talk to ben
Caption: ben is very privileged ben is white and
Caption: male ben has no ongoing health
Caption: conditions ben's got a full-time job
Caption: with a good salary ben has a bachelor
Caption: degree he's paid off his hex debt
Caption: something i'm sure not many of us can
Caption: say and ben is heterosexual and married
Caption: being people-centered means you have to
Caption: consider all of the people who are
Caption: involved
Caption: if we use healthcare as an example this
Caption: means the patients this means the
Caption: doctors the families the general
Caption: practitioners specialists technicians
Caption: nurses and the list goes on you need to
Caption: think about everybody in that community
Caption: now how do you actually do this
Caption: well you does
Caption: obvious solutions with connecting with
Caption: stakeholders doing field interviews
Caption: setting up meetings and going out and
Caption: observing in the different industries
Caption: and this can be costly
Caption: i'd like to note here that it's not as
Caption: costly as spending a year developing
Caption: something that the community doesn't
Caption: actually want
Caption: but you should also consider the ways
Caption: you can use your current channels to be
Caption: engaging in this process
Caption: for example i always have an open
Caption: communication channel that i invite
Caption: stakeholders to
Caption: and i can really quickly and easily drop
Caption: in issues that we're having questions we
Caption: might have and keep the community on
Caption: board with the progress we're making in
Caption: the app and those decisions that we're
Caption: making so you could even be thinking
Caption: about here how can you repurpose
Caption: the the technology and the systems
Caption: already available to you that might mean
Caption: making a dedicated channel and teams for
Caption: example where you can invite some key
Caption: stakeholders
Caption: for me this part of the process is
Caption: really important and i couldn't develop
Caption: any work without having that open
Caption: communication channel with the
Caption: stakeholders involved
Caption: so simply put we want to learn about the
Caption: people that we're designing for and then
Caption: we want to take time to make sense of
Caption: what we've learned and i've got this as
Caption: a separate point because we don't want
Caption: to come in with assumptions about who
Caption: ben is
Caption: because ben's very unpredictable he'll
Caption: surprise us
Caption: we then want to
Caption: look at opportunities for how we can
Caption: prov improve people's lives and we want
Caption: to do so ethically only then should we
Caption: start prototyping while maintaining
Caption: contact with our community stakeholders
Caption: now some of you have caught on ben is a
Caption: real person he's my husband and he's in
Caption: the front row here so let's all thank
Caption: ben
Caption: well i'm not quite sure how i'm going
Caption: for time if there's any time for
Caption: questions
Caption: and ben is uh in uh on just after me by
Caption: the way in the main theater so that's
Caption: been running off to get ready for his
Caption: talk ben will be talking about offline
Caption: mode offline first not offline mode uh
Caption: in the lecture theater
Caption: uh great talk uh congratulations uh for
Caption: ben good sport
Caption: um uh
Caption: any tips on how to affect change within
Caption: an organization on using inclusive
Caption: language people when it's so ingrained
Caption: in in that culture
Caption: absolutely so this can be probably the
Caption: toughest one i find uh simply so i write
Caption: a lot of the reports myself and i'll
Caption: actually use inclusive language in the
Caption: reports that i am making so i very much
Caption: try to push that from the point of view
Caption: of the same as uh when i'm in the
Caption: classroom being the one that's making
Caption: the change and setting that example
Caption: there's other solutions such as actually
Caption: getting community stakeholders in
Caption: so i find that while that can be quite
Caption: costly it can be really effective when
Caption: people are being told about the
Caption: importance of inclusive language from
Caption: the people who are actually affected by
Caption: it
Caption: looking at healthcare as an example
Caption: bringing people in who actually suffer
Caption: from disabilities and talking about the
Caption: way some language impacts them can
Caption: really change people's focus because it
Caption: stops it from being an abstract term and
Caption: that's the issue we have with language
Caption: these terms they just feel really
Caption: abstract we don't connect them to people
Caption: when you're actually faced with the
Caption: people you're using this terminology for
Caption: it can be enough to start pushing for
Caption: that change
Caption: any other question
Caption: thank you so much thank you
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott hanselman
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: let's go
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are
Caption: welcome everyone
Caption: our next speaker is troy gerwin
Caption: his talk is on the limits of my
Caption: programming language
Caption: meaning the limits mean the limits of my
Caption: world troy is a software engineer with
Caption: broad industrial experience and he's
Caption: currently developing games at vgw he
Caption: maintains he also maintains and
Caption: contributes
Caption: to several open source projects and is a
Caption: mentor at coda dijo
Caption: troy is interested in what makes
Caption: software great not just for the user but
Caption: also for the team maintaining a big
Caption: welcome to troy
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: thanks for that introduction thanks
Caption: everyone for for coming
Caption: and also of course thanks to the
Caption: sponsors who've made this whole thing
Caption: possible and also the volunteers and the
Caption: organizers
Caption: one other thing
Caption: to remember about ddd is that it's a
Caption: democracy and that's a cool thing right
Caption: but you know what the problem is with
Caption: democracy
Caption: sometimes
Caption: candidates uh make promises to get voted
Caption: in
Caption: and then they find that they can't
Caption: deliver on their promises
Caption: so when ddd called for submissions i was
Caption: just thinking like what would be a cool
Caption: talk what would be something interesting
Caption: to go to i just sort of thought of this
Caption: um there was a phrase that was popping
Caption: up and i googled and i found okay was
Caption: this phrase by wittgenstein a
Caption: philosopher and he said the limits of my
Caption: language mean the limits of my world and
Caption: i thought wow that'd be an interesting
Caption: thing to think about with programming
Caption: languages like are we actually stopping
Caption: ourselves from doing a better job as a
Caption: software industry because of limits in
Caption: our programming language not being able
Caption: to come up with better solutions or or
Caption: less buggy solutions so i just
Caption: shoved one word in there and i thought
Caption: okay that's a nice catchy title all i
Caption: need to do now is come up with a pitch
Caption: and here's like a little summarized
Caption: version if you don't remember it but i'm
Caption: just saying like you know badly designed
Caption: programming languages thought inhibitors
Caption: are they part of the reason why we ship
Caption: projects late and
Caption: and with flaws
Caption: so that's as far as i went unfortunately
Caption: i delivered the promise but i didn't
Caption: actually stop to think of what it would
Caption: take to to
Caption: to actually fulfill the promise so when
Caption: my talk actually got selected i started
Caption: to think about what the content would be
Caption: for this talk and i thought oh crap
Caption: anyway it's too late to change the pitch
Caption: at that point
Caption: and i didn't want to do a bait and
Caption: switch because there's a lot of depth
Caption: and a lot of breadth to this topic it
Caption: turns out um so i could either just fly
Caption: over the you know
Caption: fly over the landscape and not really
Caption: give much detail anywhere or i could
Caption: deep dive into one thing but then i
Caption: really feel like i'd be breaking my
Caption: promise which was to sort of cover a bit
Caption: more broadly um in early feedback i gave
Caption: this talk earlier a draft version of
Caption: this and i got some really cool feedback
Caption: and someone said this talk title could
Caption: be the title of a whole tech conference
Caption: you could have a whole tech conference
Caption: about this and then people would go to
Caption: the individual talks and focus on the
Caption: different areas and i thought that's a
Caption: cool idea and it actually gave me a way
Caption: of thinking about what this talk that
Caption: you've come to would be this talk would
Caption: be the keynote so imagine that we've got
Caption: a whole whole day to talk about this
Caption: topic and this this talk then just means
Caption: i can just kind of like go at 10 000
Caption: meters over the landscape and just maybe
Caption: point out a few little details here and
Caption: there knowing that you know that's
Caption: something that you can follow up in a in
Caption: a in detail in another area all i can do
Caption: is really just give it five minutes
Caption: and just cover a whole lot of things
Caption: so just at this high level we're talking
Caption: about programming languages and i
Caption: thought that this this is a quote from a
Caption: really great introductory textbook on
Caption: functional programming by a couple of
Caption: guys who are really influential in the
Caption: ml community and developing camel in
Caption: particular
Caption: and they said the programming language
Caption: we use influences our capacity as
Caption: programmers to produce correct programs
Caption: within a reasonable period of time and
Caption: something implied in this we're not
Caption: talking there's no problem with express
Caption: being able to express solutions we can
Caption: express solutions most of you have
Caption: probably heard of during completeness it
Caption: just means if something's true and
Caption: complete you can compute absolutely
Caption: anything that is computable with with
Caption: that device or that language or whatever
Caption: it is and it's actually surprisingly low
Caption: bar
Caption: redstone blocks in minecraft are turing
Caption: complete excel spreadsheets are cheering
Caption: complete i just found out in a previous
Caption: talk i went to that powerpoint slides
Caption: are turing complete you could you could
Caption: build your line of business application
Caption: as a deck of powerpoint slides if you
Caption: really wanted to um but we don't do that
Caption: because but the two real key things are
Caption: not can you build it it's that can you
Caption: build it in a reasonable period of time
Caption: and with few enough defects so these are
Caption: the the two
Caption: uh really important things so just to
Caption: summarize those two things i've just
Caption: used the words convenience and
Caption: correctness so these are kind of like
Caption: the the themes that will come back again
Caption: and again
Caption: um
Caption: the pictures you might be wondering what
Caption: that's all about i went to another
Caption: conference the other day that my work
Caption: put on and i just heard this phrase
Caption: dragons and rabbit holes and i thought
Caption: hey that kind of applies so dragons like
Caption: on the edge of the map there'd be
Caption: dragons right they're the things you
Caption: want to avoid the bugs the the undefined
Caption: behavior in your program so that's
Caption: that's correctness
Caption: rabbit holes is when in the context of
Caption: programming languages it's really
Caption: difficult to figure out how do i express
Caption: the the problem that i'm trying to solve
Caption: in the language the language maybe it
Caption: gives you no clear ways to do it and
Caption: you've got to build up all this stuff
Caption: yourself or you're out there searching
Caption: through half a dozen libraries that give
Caption: you different trade-offs and so on so
Caption: convenience is about how
Caption: what's a reasonable amount of time to be
Caption: able to come up with a good solution and
Caption: how maintainable is that solution so
Caption: these are the two sort of overarching
Caption: themes that we come across
Caption: um
Caption: just to briefly go on those actually i i
Caption: think for time i won't go into details
Caption: but some of you may have heard of the
Caption: sapir wharf hypothesis so convenience is
Caption: really about this idea that that limits
Caption: in what language you what your language
Caption: can express i mean you know limits in
Caption: what you can actually do so it's
Caption: language as a thought tool it can
Caption: basically multiply your powers or it
Caption: could divide your powers
Caption: so this is the effort to express
Caption: requirements as a as a program using a
Caption: programming language so the the the
Caption: general thing with convenience is that
Caption: we seem to be suggesting that we want
Caption: more flexibility and we want rich
Caption: language because that's going to make it
Caption: more convenient on the other side
Caption: correctness the safety of being able to
Caption: express things in a program
Caption: the the set of possible programs that
Caption: exist out there is huge right probably
Caption: infinite definitely infinite but a lot
Caption: of those programs that we could possibly
Caption: express they're subtly wrong they might
Caption: be almost the right solution but not
Caption: quite but we can still express them so
Caption: if this sort of implies that we want
Caption: less expressiveness we want to basically
Caption: cut off avenues towards expressing
Caption: programs that are wrong that are subtly
Caption: wrong
Caption: for example some soft some programming
Caption: languages allow you to express memory
Caption: management explicitly
Caption: but they introduce the dangers because
Caption: of that because they allow you to
Caption: express all the incorrect patterns of
Caption: memory management as well
Caption: on the other hand you've got languages
Caption: like java or c-sharp that have automatic
Caption: memory management you cannot express
Caption: memory management patterns it doesn't
Caption: let you do it it just does it
Caption: automatically so it's less expressive
Caption: but it's more correct
Caption: so if this was a
Caption: fictional conference pl conf 22 this
Caption: would be the the billing of the talks so
Caption: i'm going to talk just briefly about a
Caption: bunch of topics here basically some
Caption: fundamentals at the beginning
Caption: this general
Caption: theme that i want to bring out that
Caption: programming languages are for humans and
Caption: then a couple of deep dives at the end
Caption: all right getting started on the first
Caption: one
Caption: just about motivation
Caption: why would we care about programming
Caption: language design does it really matter in
Caption: the real world
Caption: so
Caption: mark anderson about 10 years ago
Caption: put out a paper
Caption: an article that was quite well known
Caption: wall street journal software is eating
Caption: the world and he was just pointing out
Caption: how we've just got this unprecedented
Caption: and growing uh global dependence on
Caption: software systems uh there's some just
Caption: look at the companies that i've listed
Caption: there think about what they've how
Caption: they've transformed our economy so
Caption: bookshops amazon comes along the the
Caption: global book industry is now basically a
Caption: software industry uh uber uber doesn't
Caption: have taxis they don't have their own
Caption: drivers they're basically they have an
Caption: app and they have a bunch of software
Caption: running on the back end and and that's
Caption: the the global company um so more and
Caption: more of the global economy is actually
Caption: software it's built and and runs off of
Caption: software so this also implies that
Caption: there's these growing and huge risk and
Caption: reward multipliers because so much of
Caption: what of our economic everyday activity
Caption: is mediated through software
Caption: so if you can increase the convenience
Caption: of being able to create that software
Caption: more quickly or more reliably uh you
Caption: might have a great competitive advantage
Caption: equally if you can improve the
Caption: correctness because of new patterns in
Caption: in programming languages that just you
Caption: know block off avenues of expressing
Caption: bugs
Caption: you might experience less hacks less
Caption: exploits and less failures which is also
Caption: going to be
Caption: good so i'm not suggesting that um
Caption: programming languages are the only
Caption: problem for
Caption: improving our productivity with software
Caption: they're probably not even the major
Caption: factor because we've got people and
Caption: we've got processors and that's usually
Caption: where you look if you want to make
Caption: things more efficient
Caption: but i i don't think it's zero i think
Caption: that i what i'd like to demonstrate
Caption: today is that programming languages
Caption: themselves can shift the needle on
Caption: things that are actually important in
Caption: the real world
Caption: and even if it's a small amount we're
Caption: talking a huge numbers here right so
Caption: it's still a huge number
Caption: so the question is what about these
Caption: numbers like are we doing fine as a
Caption: software industry or aren't we so it's
Caption: not hard to actually just like troll the
Caption: internet and look for examples look for
Caption: studies i just listed a whole bunch here
Caption: i'm not going to go through all of these
Caption: but just you can see the the general
Caption: size of the numbers so the capital t is
Caption: trillion um there's studies there that
Caption: are just estimating the cost of software
Caption: failures in the us alone at something
Caption: like 2 trillion dollars a year which is
Caption: like 10 of the economy um even if the
Caption: estimates are way off even if they're
Caption: vaguely in the ballpark it's that we're
Caption: talking really huge numbers
Caption: um there's lots of other things there
Caption: that are easy to find if you're
Caption: interested there's also really
Caption: interesting individual examples and i'll
Caption: just highlight this therap-25 back in
Caption: the 80s was a medical device
Caption: i believe for taking x-rays of patients
Caption: and injuries and deaths were involved so
Caption: that was a combined hardware software
Caption: system that they wrote their own
Caption: software for that system the company
Caption: that released it it had preemptive
Caption: multitasking it was basically written in
Caption: assembly language and it also had
Caption: mutable shared state so the language
Caption: they were using didn't protect against
Caption: any of those things it was all up to the
Caption: the programmers to be able to spot their
Caption: own errors
Caption: and in all their test suites everything
Caption: worked fine because they tested it in
Caption: test conditions had no problems
Caption: eventually they actually injured and
Caption: killed
Caption: a number of people
Caption: because certain operators using that
Caption: machine typed a bit too fast at the
Caption: wrong time and that triggered a race
Caption: condition in their code
Caption: and they didn't admit it for a long time
Caption: because they couldn't reproduce it but
Caption: that was definitely an issue that could
Caption: be resolved with a different choice of
Caption: programming language
Caption: so that's just one example and there's
Caption: others there as well
Caption: it's also easy to come across articles
Caption: like this so microsoft did an internal
Caption: study and found that 70 of their
Caption: security bugs are memory safety issues
Caption: and in that article they particularly
Caption: highlight that a lot of the software
Caption: involves written in c and c plus plus
Caption: memory unsafe languages where one slip
Caption: up in the developer's memory management
Caption: code can lead to a slew of memory safety
Caption: errors that attackers can exploit with
Caption: dangerous and
Caption: intrusive consequences so that's really
Caption: sheeting home uh consequences directly
Caption: to the programming language choice
Caption: itself
Caption: so just to sum up that section
Caption: programming language design definitely
Caption: does have real world consequences
Caption: okay
Caption: another one of these topics that we
Caption: would fly over in this conference would
Caption: be that there's never going to be one
Caption: programming language to rule them all
Caption: wouldn't it it'd be nice right um but
Caption: well
Caption: here's a picture of uh each of those
Caption: little words it doesn't matter they're
Caption: too small to read but they're all names
Caption: of programming languages and the little
Caption: lines between them basically trace
Caption: influence and we're going down the page
Caption: so we're back in the 70s at the top and
Caption: we're down to
Caption: a few years ago at the bottom
Caption: anyway i don't know about you but i
Caption: don't really see much sense of
Caption: convergence
Caption: in here um it's and also it seems like
Caption: ideas have been around for a long time
Caption: and they influence they they go away
Caption: they come back
Caption: so consensus in programming languages
Caption: doesn't seem to really be there so why
Caption: is that
Caption: it's not for lack of trying
Caption: so
Caption: the the current candidate for the one
Caption: programming language to rule them all in
Caption: many people's views is javascript and at
Caption: would even make law about what he
Caption: claimed you know to be a law that
Caption: anything that can be written in
Caption: javascript will eventually be written in
Caption: javascript and on the far side on my
Caption: on the right hand side there uh it
Caption: probably too small to read but just
Caption: gives you a glimpse this is the tc39
Caption: committee that decides what things are
Caption: going to make it into the next version
Caption: of javascript and pretty much everyone
Caption: this is this is like a third of just
Caption: what fits on a screen it goes down and
Caption: these are only stage one proposals they
Caption: also have stage zero stage one two three
Caption: and then four means it's in the language
Caption: so basically every everybody is trying
Caption: to get the language to do their thing so
Caption: you know it's not like we don't want
Caption: there to be one language to rule them
Caption: all um this is not new so tony hawe who
Caption: gave us quicksort um he also gave us
Caption: nulls the billion-dollar mistake uh he's
Caption: a quote from a paper that he wrote he
Caption: was he says we were charged with the
Caption: standardization of a language to end all
Caption: languages designed to meet the needs of
Caption: all computer applications both
Caption: commercial and scientific and that was
Caption: in the 1960s in reference to pli which
Caption: most of you including me have probably
Caption: never even seen
Caption: let alone worked on so i guess that
Caption: didn't work out either
Caption: um
Caption: the problem really comes down to the
Caption: fact that there's competing goals in
Caption: programming language design so i'm not
Caption: going to go through all of these but
Caption: just to give you an idea there's just
Caption: some i just hammered out just
Caption: i think a lot of them would be make
Caption: sense but i'll give you one illustration
Caption: so
Caption: going back to this example with memory
Caption: safety um that's relevant here
Caption: so some trade-offs here so for example
Caption: if you you have a fresh new application
Caption: you need to develop and you're trying to
Caption: choose which language to use
Caption: if you had absolute real-time
Caption: performance requirements where you
Caption: cannot stand um garbage collection
Caption: pauses let's say so you're on the side
Caption: of having to have absolute performance
Caption: there is a trade-off uh there in the
Caption: sense that you probably wouldn't want to
Caption: use java and c-sharp because they do
Caption: automatic memory management at the cost
Caption: of some stuttering some pauses and um
Caption: just unpredictable
Caption: performance so
Caption: you would probably want to go on the
Caption: c-plus plus or rust side because you can
Caption: actually literally control
Caption: the memory management in the programming
Caption: language itself
Caption: on the other hand is there a trade-off
Caption: let's say at the bottom between
Caption: java and rust so if if we choose rust
Caption: because it's really safe with memory uh
Caption: why why would we always choose rust well
Caption: maybe performance isn't the the top
Caption: thing maybe it's just speed of
Caption: development and i'm not a super
Caption: proficient rust developer but having
Caption: looked around i can see that you know a
Caption: lot of people say it's not that
Caption: straightforward to satisfy the borrower
Caption: checker you've got to do it you've got
Caption: to really understand what you're doing
Caption: in a non-trivial application so why
Caption: would you even put that barrier in front
Caption: of your team of software developers if
Caption: absolute real-time performance wasn't an
Caption: issue maybe you're just developing a
Caption: simple app for your own use or i don't
Caption: know there's lots of situations where
Caption: you might not have that requirement so
Caption: there's a trade-off there it's it's
Caption: harder to get the thing up and running
Caption: and shipped in rust than it would be in
Caption: java and c-sharp so it really depends on
Caption: whether you have that performance
Caption: requirement or not so that's just some
Caption: examples of trade-offs okay moving on
Caption: this section would be about
Caption: essential and accidental complexity so
Caption: this concept came from fred books brooks
Caption: who gave us the book the mythical man
Caption: month so back in the 80s he also wrote
Caption: his paper called no silver bullet and he
Caption: he gave us this nice way of thinking
Caption: about software systems as uh having two
Caption: kinds of complexity in them essential
Caption: complexity and accidental complexity so
Caption: essential complexity in software is
Caption: basically the stuff you can't get rid of
Caption: because it's the spec it's like here
Caption: here's the spec please go and implement
Caption: a program that does this that does what
Caption: it says so if it's in the spec
Caption: and the specs complicated that's
Caption: essential complexity if it says you've
Caption: got to do those 25 things you've got to
Caption: do those 25 things if it says you have
Caption: to interface with three wildly
Caption: incompatible terribly written external
Caption: systems that's an essential thing
Caption: because that's what's in the spec right
Caption: so you can't avoid it um accidental
Caption: complexity on the other hand is stuff
Caption: that still makes it difficult and
Caption: complex they're just basically unhelpful
Caption: barriers to expressing a working
Caption: solution but they're not inherent in the
Caption: spec so for example
Caption: uh manual memory management if you're
Caption: thinking about managing your memory but
Caption: the spec just says well we need this
Caption: this mobile app for the customer that's
Caption: accidental complexity it's just
Caption: something you you have to do on top of
Caption: solving the the essential problem
Caption: and choosing different tools can affect
Caption: how much accidental complexity makes up
Caption: the the overall complexity of your job
Caption: so
Caption: essential complexity sounds like
Caption: something you can't get rid of i just
Caption: wanted to briefly mention that it's not
Caption: actually true
Caption: you can reduce essential complexity but
Caption: with another trade-off so if you think
Caption: about domain specific languages or even
Caption: visual programming languages they tend
Caption: to be
Caption: reduce essential complexity by allowing
Caption: you to state things at a higher level
Caption: you can quickly say
Caption: how you want things to be done so for
Caption: example sql for data access so we don't
Caption: write
Caption: python generally for
Caption: doing database queries on a relational
Caption: database we write sql and it's really
Caption: quick and it gets the job done but it's
Caption: basically a domain specific language or
Caption: a dsl for that one job so it sacrifices
Caption: generality but it means you can do that
Caption: one job well so that's great there's
Caption: languages that do things regex would be
Caption: another example there's lots of them but
Caption: they don't solve the general problem
Caption: it's not like if you're given a brief
Caption: that you've got to develop a whole app
Caption: you you go for the specific dsl that
Caption: probably isn't one in most cases you
Caption: need a general language so you can't
Caption: always make this trade-off
Caption: um on the other hand accidental
Caption: complexity
Caption: so
Caption: we still you know there's things like
Caption: boilerplate code if you have to if
Caption: you're writing your app if you have to
Caption: think about managing memory yourself or
Caption: managing concurrency managing
Caption: dependencies managing versions these
Caption: aren't things that are in the spec
Caption: they're just things that you've got to
Caption: get right and they just they're just
Caption: unhelpful barriers that get in your way
Caption: um
Caption: brooks in no silver bullet interestingly
Caption: says we've already solved the accidental
Caption: complexity problem for the most part
Caption: that's that was his view back in the
Caption: 1980s um
Caption: i don't know if any of you uh have can
Caption: think of what he said was the number one
Caption: thing that made the biggest difference
Caption: in accident in solving accidental
Caption: complexity
Caption: so
Caption: the thing that made the biggest
Caption: difference was in his uh view high-level
Caption: language so high-level language just
Caption: means now this is something we
Caption: completely take for granted when you
Caption: write program code in in any programming
Caption: language that we use today pretty much
Caption: you are writing code using for example
Caption: english keywords it's human
Caption: understandable it's written in a high
Caption: level you can kind of see that the loops
Caption: and the conditions in the code
Caption: and it's translated down to something
Caption: that the machine can understand so
Caption: that's what we mean by high langu high
Caption: language high level language it's that
Caption: the code is independent of the machine
Caption: that is going to run it the the specific
Caption: things the machine has to do they're not
Caption: represented there in the language that's
Caption: high level language um he estimates that
Caption: that gave us a five times productivity
Caption: boost so i thought it would be
Caption: interesting rather than just you know
Caption: five times what does that mean you know
Caption: we don't really think about it right but
Caption: i'd like us to actually think what it
Caption: was like for our compatriots software
Caption: developers back in the day before
Caption: high-level languages just to give you an
Caption: idea of how important accidental
Caption: complexity can actually be so what were
Caption: they doing well first example this is
Caption: something that i personally remember
Caption: because i had a commodore 64 when i was
Caption: a kid and no money so rather than being
Caption: able to go and buy all the cool games
Caption: off the shelf sometimes we'd come across
Caption: a magazine and it would say type the
Caption: game in yourself so
Caption: it just sounds awesome when you're a kid
Caption: when you read the description space
Caption: blaster this is going to be so awesome
Caption: like it's action packed and everything
Caption: like that but then you've got to write
Caption: this out yourself and you can see
Caption: there's a few lines of basic at the top
Caption: that's bootstrapping but pretty much the
Caption: whole game is actually in machine
Caption: language for the 6502 cpu inside the
Caption: commodore 64. and you have to specify it
Caption: bite by byte as these like um
Caption: hex codes
Caption: the other thing is if you get any of
Caption: those wrong if you get one letter wrong
Caption: one character wrong in any of that
Caption: well if you're lucky you've probably
Caption: just screwed up a sprite and it's the
Caption: you know the colors are mixed up in
Caption: somewhere but more likely most of that
Caption: will be control flow and logic for the
Caption: game and if you just basically change a
Caption: bite there
Caption: all bets are off you probably crash your
Caption: machine lock it up or who knows it
Caption: probably won't be the fun uh space
Caption: blaster experience you're hoping for
Caption: going back even before that they had
Caption: even extra steps you know they'd fill
Caption: out these punched cards so i won't go
Caption: too much into that that's really going
Caption: back but i think you get the idea that
Caption: there was a lot of accidental complexity
Caption: involved in developing software back
Caption: then you've got to think at a really low
Caption: level um the other thing is there's
Caption: pretty much no protection from errors
Caption: because the way there's no
Caption: interpretation step what you present to
Caption: the computer it goes well this is what
Caption: this must be what you meant i'll just
Caption: try and execute it so basically i like
Caption: to think of that as a cosmic ray on your
Caption: on your um punch card give just gives
Caption: you a new program as far as the computer
Caption: is concerned oh okay every program that
Caption: you give me is what i think you meant
Caption: and it just executes differently
Caption: so a little a little taste of that
Caption: 6502 this was the cpu inside the
Caption: commodore 64. and also the apple ii i've
Caption: got like six
Caption: bytes of machine code at the top there
Caption: and that decompiles into these assembly
Caption: language instructions it's just a little
Caption: loop it just starts at 255 and it counts
Caption: down to zero and then and then it
Caption: returns so that's all it does what i'm
Caption: going to do is on that last spot i'm
Caption: just going to change the 60 to a 61.
Caption: it's one bit it's just changing one bit
Caption: so watch watch down the bottom
Caption: and now instead of returning from the
Caption: instruction i'm doing some further
Caption: arithmetic and i'm not returning and
Caption: whatever comes after that is what is
Caption: what the process is going to keep doing
Caption: that's a good example that's probably
Caption: just going to lock up your machine um
Caption: yeah
Caption: i had to restart my computer a lot of
Caption: times
Caption: um just another example so now i'm just
Caption: going to transpose the the two parts of
Caption: the third byte so instead of ca it's
Caption: going to be ac and we can watch down the
Caption: bottom again and now i've got pretty
Caption: much a completely different program
Caption: there's now no loop at all and it also
Caption: still doesn't return so uh you're going
Caption: to get a
Caption: vastly different outcome and i just
Caption: changed a couple of bits the program
Caption: looks the same so that's all accidental
Caption: complexity
Caption: um just a bonus question to end this
Caption: section can anyone think of any language
Caption: that we still use very commonly probably
Caption: most software developers in this room
Caption: have have used at some point
Caption: that has some of these characteristics
Caption: that i've just been describing
Caption: yeah
Caption: yes
Caption: yes exactly regex i like to call it a
Caption: write-only language
Caption: see if you can think of what this regex
Caption: does i i won't call for um volunteers
Caption: but i'll just tell you it's it actually
Caption: parses um or validates
Caption: email addresses that's not obvious from
Caption: looking at it so the way you would come
Caption: up with that is you'd think at a high
Caption: level okay what are the parts of an
Caption: email address and you translate it down
Caption: into this kind of almost like machine
Caption: language um and then if you ever try and
Caption: want to know what that does again i
Caption: would probably just copy it and paste it
Caption: into one of those websites that sort of
Caption: decompiles and regex for you and gives
Caption: you a visualization it's not that
Caption: different from what they were doing back
Caption: in the day so yeah we still have this
Caption: okay moving on again
Caption: now we're moving to this section where
Caption: i'm really focusing on the human aspect
Caption: of programming language design
Caption: um
Caption: we don't want to overburden the human
Caption: why is that well
Caption: i'm just going to start with this quote
Caption: from donald knuth he's pointing out that
Caption: programming is the art of telling
Caption: another human being
Caption: what one wants the computer to do
Caption: programming languages aren't for the
Caption: machine they're therefore people if if
Caption: programming languages were for the
Caption: machine we'd still be programming in
Caption: assembly language or machine language
Caption: because that's the easiest thing for the
Caption: machine to process the reason why we use
Caption: these high-level languages and then all
Caption: these very sophisticated tools to
Caption: translate that down to the machine is
Caption: that the source code of programs is for
Caption: us it's for humans
Caption: so um if you think about what's scarce
Caption: in the production of software it's
Caption: definitely not making more copies of it
Caption: it's free to make more copies of
Caption: software like all the the the raw
Caption: materials of what we use uh
Caption: ram in memory cpu cycles like they're
Caption: really cheap the marginal cost of that
Caption: is almost zero um so why is software
Caption: expensive and why you know we talked
Caption: before about the trillions of dollars
Caption: worth of you know the cost of software
Caption: bugs what what makes up the expense well
Caption: i i'd say it's actually human ability so
Caption: humans we've got limited working memory
Caption: limited cognitive powers and limited
Caption: reliability this kind of links back to
Caption: the keynote this morning when we're
Caption: talking about talking about
Caption: fallibility of human memory in
Caption: particular so that's just one of these
Caption: things
Caption: and programming languages that um adapt
Caption: for that can actually really empower us
Caption: ones that ignore the humanness uh and
Caption: and
Caption: we'll see some examples anyway
Caption: they're probably the ones where it's
Caption: going to be harder to express a correct
Caption: program and and increase your rate of
Caption: bugs
Caption: so how could the programming language
Caption: itself how could the design of it
Caption: actually help with this sort of human
Caption: focus on the programming language
Caption: particularly humans being limited so
Caption: i've just got a whole bunch of examples
Caption: there i just bolded a couple that i
Caption: could just briefly speak to like raising
Caption: the level of abstraction to reduce the
Caption: semantic gap so
Caption: um
Caption: we saw before you know literally putting
Caption: in the hex codes you can't really look
Caption: at that and see what the program does
Caption: although i did do an early version of
Caption: this and someone who saw the commodore
Caption: 64 stuff says i know what that does
Caption: because he had one when he and he still
Caption: remembers all the op codes but for most
Caption: of us
Caption: if you see source code you want to see
Caption: something that is kind of human readable
Caption: for most of us in here that's things
Caption: like you know the english keywords and
Caption: visual
Caption: breakdown of of blocks in the code and i
Caption: put that one there visuality use layout
Caption: and um keywords and punctuation to
Caption: actually make you know we can recognize
Caption: patterns visually very very quickly so
Caption: if your source code actually allows for
Caption: that pattern recognition of humans by
Caption: having visually indented and
Caption: delimited blocks we can see that very
Caption: very quickly that works with us it helps
Caption: us to produce software faster and with
Caption: less mistakes
Caption: and also we what we really want to
Caption: optimize in our code is
Caption: understandability not necessarily making
Caption: source code as short as possible having
Caption: a language that is the the shortest to
Caption: express or the most minimal language
Caption: like the one with the fewest constructs
Caption: that doesn't necessarily win if it comes
Caption: at the expense of human
Caption: understandability
Caption: so
Caption: just one quick example for this section
Caption: i'd say most of us are pretty familiar
Caption: with basic control flow constructs like
Caption: this so control flow is basically just
Caption: um it's an imperative concept for
Caption: imperative languages which are the ones
Caption: i'd say most of us use like java c-sharp
Caption: things like that you do things in order
Caption: there's a time-based component i do step
Caption: one then i do step two and if that's all
Caption: you could do step one two three you
Caption: could only write a linear a logic
Caption: program and it would always terminate
Caption: depending on how long you know just
Caption: basically how many lines you've got if
Caption: you want things that run forever um or
Caption: you know run indefinitely let's say
Caption: probably you don't want an infinite loop
Caption: uh you need control flow constructs that
Caption: can alter the order in which statements
Caption: are executed and these really common
Caption: ones the top two are loops so you can
Caption: keep repeating the same series of
Caption: instructions while some condition is
Caption: true
Caption: or you could loop over every item in a
Caption: collection so they're really common and
Caption: then the bottom two are conditionals so
Caption: it's like just conditionally execute
Caption: these things if a certain condition is
Caption: true otherwise skip them
Caption: or
Caption: look at this value and then depending on
Caption: what it is either do this or do this or
Caption: do this so that's like a switch
Caption: statement um pretty basic like you know
Caption: i think we're all familiar with that
Caption: but what if i told you we could go even
Caption: simpler what if i told you that a single
Caption: control flow construct could do
Caption: everything all those others do and we
Caption: can just sweep them away and make our
Caption: language even simpler with just one kind
Caption: of control flow well it exists
Caption: if condition go to label
Caption: so
Caption: it just means that you should be able to
Caption: label any line in your code and then you
Caption: can say well if this condition is true
Caption: when you execute this line just jump to
Caption: that other label
Caption: so um i thought i'd give a demonstration
Caption: to show how great this would be i picked
Caption: a modern language that actually still
Caption: allows go to so i was actually able to
Caption: test it and this is working code so i've
Caption: started with a a prime generator that's
Caption: pretty straightforward it basically just
Caption: goes through all the numbers from 100
Caption: and then for that number it does an
Caption: inner loop to try and find something
Caption: that divides into it that excludes it
Caption: from being a prime so
Caption: if it if it gets through that inner loop
Caption: and it hasn't fine found any divisors
Caption: then it's still a prime and then we just
Caption: print it to the console and that's what
Caption: it prints out one two three five seven
Caption: and so on
Caption: up to 97. so i just chose that example
Caption: because it's relatively simple but it's
Caption: got it's got loops and it's got
Caption: conditionals in it now i'm going to
Caption: transform it using my awesome one one
Caption: only control flow construct if
Caption: condition go to label so first of all i
Caption: get rid of the outer for loop and i've
Caption: replaced that i needed a couple of
Caption: labels and a couple of new go to
Caption: statements but it's the same program
Caption: still works the same this is this is all
Caption: valid c sharp um then i get rid of the
Caption: inner for loop then i get rid of the
Caption: first if and then i get rid of the
Caption: second if and now i've got a final
Caption: program that does exactly the same thing
Caption: as the first one but it's way simpler
Caption: because it's only got one control flow
Caption: construct and also we got rid of all
Caption: that weird indenting and now it's all
Caption: nice and straight
Caption: so there's my before and there's my
Caption: after okay it's slightly longer
Caption: what would you choose in terms of i mean
Caption: we're talking here about human limited
Caption: human cognitive ability right um maybe
Caption: it's just my training but i would take
Caption: the one on the left still
Caption: even though you could say it's more
Caption: complex because it's got more different
Caption: constructs so it's not about minimality
Caption: sometimes it's about working with the
Caption: human the way we think i can visually
Caption: see
Caption: the loops in this one on that one i
Caption: would basically have to run it in my
Caption: head
Caption: so um if you look for pictures of go to
Caption: people doing go-to programming you often
Caption: find these print um these screenshots
Caption: that they've done of some old bit of
Caption: working out where they'd obviously drawn
Caption: all over the program source code to try
Caption: and um get it into their head what's
Caption: actually going on so on the left we've
Caption: just got these you can express any
Caption: control flow with these three constructs
Caption: sequence selection repetition um on the
Caption: right you can just use one control flow
Caption: construct but it's actually a lot harder
Caption: to understand
Caption: okay
Caption: so
Caption: um that's probably a good segue into
Caption: this one which is also about uh the
Caption: humanity the human side of programming
Caption: languages and how to take it into
Caption: account so before we were saying don't
Caption: over burden the human now we're saying
Caption: don't rely on the human because even if
Caption: you make it easy for them humans are
Caption: fallible we make mistakes
Caption: so um
Caption: the the main point i want to make in
Caption: this section briefly is that if a
Caption: programming task could be described as a
Caption: set of mechanical transforms
Caption: then design the programming language
Caption: itself to just fully automate that just
Caption: take it out of the hands of the human
Caption: because we're not that good at
Caption: perfectly reproducing the same
Caption: transformation again and again in a
Caption: manual way
Caption: i ca i call this um the human compiler
Caption: anti-pattern so uh i don't think you'll
Caption: find that on google because i just made
Caption: it up
Caption: um
Caption: but the reason i call it the human
Caption: compiler anti-patent because i'm
Caption: thinking that you know people even get
Caption: proud of doing this stuff you know it's
Caption: like wow you know i can really reliably
Caption: create this really complicated code um
Caption: but actually what they are doing could
Caption: be automated by the the programming
Caption: language tools themselves
Caption: that's great for this hotshot whoever
Caption: they are you know that's really awesome
Caption: for their self-esteem and so on but
Caption: statistically speaking as an industry
Caption: it's going to increase our error rates
Caption: if we require humans to do that sort of
Caption: stuff
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: let's have a quick look at an example
Caption: that i set up
Caption: this is javascript
Caption: and i've just got a function here
Caption: that
Caption: uh as it says at the top it returns a
Caption: number of files in a given directory so
Caption: it's a function i pass it in a directory
Caption: path and at the end it's going to return
Caption: me a number which is how many files not
Caption: directories but files in there and the
Caption: way it works is by making a couple of
Caption: system calls one is to
Caption: get a list of all the files in the
Caption: directory and it just gives the short
Caption: names of the files not the full path so
Caption: then we have to map them to full paths
Caption: and then we can go and make another
Caption: series of system calls one per file and
Caption: get the stats and the stats will tell us
Caption: if it's a file or a directory and then
Caption: we've got all the information we need to
Caption: count up the files in the directory so i
Caption: think that's pretty um pretty
Caption: straightforward and i just wanted to
Caption: highlight that this is in a sync
Caption: function
Caption: and we use a weight i don't want to go
Caption: into all the
Caption: ins and outs in that i'm hoping that
Caption: enough of you understand a bit about
Caption: asynchronous programming um to just
Caption: you know if you if you came into
Caption: javascript or another language with a
Caption: sink away in the last say five years i
Caption: think that's hopefully fairly easy to
Caption: understand um but a sink away is another
Caption: one of these things that is an
Caption: innovation that wasn't always around
Caption: what came before a sync away what was
Caption: being required of the programmer before
Caption: it sort of took care of these
Caption: concurrency patterns for us
Caption: well
Caption: when i first started using node it was
Caption: on the zero point x version number
Caption: javascript
Caption: it was always running on javascript on
Caption: v8 but javascript at the time didn't
Caption: have a sync away it didn't even have
Caption: promises
Caption: so if you wanted to do asynchronous
Caption: operations and node has always been
Caption: fully asynchronous from day one you
Caption: basically say go and start this job like
Caption: go and get the the file stats for me and
Caption: when you're done call this callback that
Caption: i'm going to give you now so it's all
Caption: callback based it's basically
Caption: continuation passing so
Caption: i've got the next slide is this exact
Caption: same program that you would have to
Caption: write manually
Caption: it's the same program
Caption: you would have to write this out
Caption: manually and manage all the uh the
Caption: callbacks yourself there's a bunch of
Caption: them
Caption: up there so
Caption: you pass you ask for a call back and
Caption: then you call that call back when you've
Caption: either got an error
Caption: well actually there's all the error
Caption: pathways so there's several ways that
Caption: you could get errors at different points
Caption: you've now got to manually do all that
Caption: bookkeeping and if you get that wrong
Caption: you might just swallow the error
Caption: or you might just actually return
Caption: several errors like a basic thing about
Caption: functions is that if you call it once
Caption: it's either going to return or it's
Caption: going to throw an exception right the
Caption: only exception to that is like an
Caption: infinite loop but we won't go into that
Caption: here you've actually got the the
Caption: erroneous possibilities of calling the
Caption: callback which is the equivalent of
Caption: returning from the function
Caption: and sending back multiple errors or
Caption: multiple returns
Caption: or even sending back errors and return
Caption: values at the same time there's so many
Caption: ways that this could go wrong but people
Caption: and and i remember you know coming
Caption: across reddit threads like it's not that
Caption: hard like i'm really good at i've never
Caption: made any mistakes um
Caption: yeah sure however
Caption: this is really just gonna on
Caption: statistically speaking on average that's
Caption: really going to reduce error rates
Caption: across the board right so if the
Caption: compiler can do it it should do it for
Caption: you
Caption: that does sort of raise the question of
Caption: design patterns because they sort of
Caption: make that thing of
Caption: really mechanical transforms on code to
Caption: to handle certain situations that you
Caption: can always apply reliably right
Caption: so i'm not saying that they're all bad
Caption: but i think it's interesting to look at
Caption: some of the design patterns and they're
Caption: written for specific languages some
Caption: design patterns you really don't need to
Caption: code in a special way depending on which
Caption: language it's in and it's an interesting
Caption: framework to look at design patterns
Caption: that they're not always a great idea
Caption: they might actually be telling you that
Caption: your programming language itself is not
Caption: expressive enough because you've got to
Caption: do this sort of manual transformation to
Caption: get the that kind of code to work that's
Caption: for that's a talk for another time so
Caption: moving on um making invalid states
Caption: unrepresentable now this is the section
Caption: that i would want to do the full talk on
Caption: because this is my jam
Caption: what i really want to talk about here is
Caption: type systems uh unfortunately i've
Caption: probably got about five minutes to cover
Caption: this section
Caption: um
Caption: and
Caption: to motivate this like why would we care
Caption: about type systems how does that fit
Caption: into this whole thing of programming
Caption: language limitations and so on well this
Caption: chart kind of says it all so on this
Caption: chart we've got these bars that get
Caption: bigger to the right um the the bigger
Caption: the bar the higher the cost to repair a
Caption: defect in software and the further to
Caption: the right you go it may seem it means
Caption: the later
Caption: the bug was discovered
Caption: so that really tall bar on the right
Caption: is bugs that were discovered in
Caption: production so you've you've crafted your
Caption: piece of software it's gone through all
Caption: your qa it's gone out to customers and
Caption: at that point the bug is discovered if
Caption: you're lucky
Caption: the bug was discovered by your customers
Caption: and only hopefully a few of them and you
Caption: might have to make them whole and that
Caption: might cost some money
Caption: if you're unlucky it might affect all
Caption: your customers catastrophically with
Caption: whatever financial losses if you're even
Caption: more unlucky it's not the customers that
Caption: are affected it's it's you that's
Caption: affected because someone has found a
Caption: vulnerability in your code and they've
Caption: found a way to hack the system and cause
Caption: all kinds of other damage like stealing
Caption: information about your customers that
Caption: can be extremely costly so that's i
Caption: think the sort of rationale for why
Caption: there's this pattern of raising costs
Caption: the further out you go
Caption: catching it earlier means catching it in
Caption: say qc but if you've got say a big team
Caption: of human qc testers there's a cost
Caption: involved in having that team right so
Caption: it's quite costly to to be using that
Caption: team
Caption: if there's whole classes of bugs that
Caption: you could find before it even leaves
Caption: your laptop where you're where you're
Caption: making the software it's even cheaper
Caption: because you never it never goes through
Caption: those later steps right so this is a
Caption: time when it's really cheap to catch
Caption: bugs the cheapest time is when you just
Caption: catch things that are wrong in the spec
Caption: before you even write code but we're
Caption: talking about programming language so
Caption: let's assume the spec is correct what
Caption: can the programming language do to
Caption: actually
Caption: help you catch bugs before they even go
Caption: out to production because it's a lot
Caption: cheaper to catch them there and that's
Caption: where type systems come in by the way
Caption: this this graph really motivates this
Caption: concept of shift left the idea of shift
Caption: left testing is basically looking at
Caption: this graph and saying with all these
Caption: defects and bugs we want to shift to the
Caption: left and catch them way earlier because
Caption: it saves us a lot of trouble uh money
Caption: and time so
Caption: um there's a very very strong link
Caption: between most people think of shift left
Caption: as having better unit tests but i think
Caption: there's a really strong link between the
Caption: idea of shift left which is great and
Caption: static type checking because
Caption: type checks are tests
Caption: they're tests that you don't have to
Caption: write as separate unit tests but they
Caption: will catch bugs for you before you even
Caption: run the code
Caption: so
Caption: good would be
Caption: that you run some sort of build tool and
Caption: it tells you so i'm looking at the top
Caption: of the screen here and it says hey
Caption: there's these errors in your code and
Caption: you can't take it any further you can't
Caption: run that program you can't release it to
Caption: production you can't merge it to main
Caption: that's great
Caption: even better
Caption: would be the middle one where as you're
Caption: just typing in your ide it's already
Caption: putting up a red squiggle and saying hey
Caption: this isn't right so just as you're
Caption: typing you're already learning that
Caption: there's a bug and you fix it straight
Caption: away super easy and cheap
Caption: even better than that is before you've
Caption: even typed something it tells you what
Caption: the options are so a lot of these powers
Caption: are actually driven by static type
Caption: systems all of this this intellisense in
Caption: the bottom that it knows what the valid
Caption: options are because of the type system
Caption: that your programming language has built
Caption: into it most of the time
Caption: so these are really powerful things
Caption: and type systems are getting really good
Caption: so i think most of us are familiar with
Caption: the old classics classes interfaces and
Caption: then basic types like numbers and
Caption: strings and booleans but if you look out
Caption: there at all the programming languages
Caption: that are being developed between
Caption: research languages functional languages
Caption: there's a lot of languages out there and
Caption: there's a lot of
Caption: types some of them are actually not new
Caption: like sum and product types have been
Caption: around for decades in functional
Caption: languages
Caption: others are like at the bottom they're
Caption: linear types and a fine types don't even
Caption: ask me what that last one is um
Caption: yeah they they can get pretty um
Caption: tricky
Caption: and
Caption: but there's a there's a richness out
Caption: there now
Caption: so
Caption: if you want to learn about some of those
Caption: things like me uh putting on a talk
Caption: where i feel like i should have some
Caption: some sort of authority about it you can
Caption: just go to youtube and start googling
Caption: making illegal states unrepresentable
Caption: and there's a whole bunch of videos and
Caption: they'll often be talking about type
Caption: system solutions to this problem of
Caption: you know making illegal states
Caption: unrepresentable basically means the type
Caption: system should pick up errors straight
Caption: away if you've specified
Caption: i don't know um
Caption: first user first name middle name last
Caption: name first and last name are required
Caption: middle name is optional if you can say
Caption: in the type system that if that
Caption: intent and you can see it in the code
Caption: then you'll catch that error straight
Caption: away if if nulls are just implicit in
Caption: all
Caption: in all strings then you can't specify
Caption: that intent in the code and you can't
Caption: catch that that error until you write a
Caption: unit test for it or it goes out to
Caption: production and crashes
Caption: so that's what that's what we're really
Caption: talking about making illegal states
Caption: unrepresentable it's a type system thing
Caption: usually um it can go pretty far so in my
Caption: wanderings i came across this video and
Caption: i thought oh there's a there's a typo in
Caption: the in the video name and then i
Caption: actually started watching the video by
Caption: the way ats is a research functional
Caption: language that implements
Caption: linear types and they can do amazing
Caption: things but the guy says in the first
Caption: sentence of his talk he says by the way
Caption: that's not a typo i actually meant to
Caption: say a tase of ats like he said you know
Caption: it's so difficult to get right that it's
Caption: like being tased um
Caption: so you know types there's a trade-off
Caption: again there's a trade-off they can be
Caption: really super powerful but they also mean
Caption: you know you might add complexity to the
Caption: development process along the way
Caption: uh that brings us to typescript which is
Caption: a language i really love
Caption: type typescript is basically making a
Caption: lot of these advanced types go
Caption: mainstream
Caption: because they set as a design goal to
Caption: statically identify constructs that are
Caption: likely to be errors
Caption: in code that already existed in massive
Caption: quantities javascript was already out
Caption: there lots of libraries were already out
Caption: there they said how could we actually
Caption: analyze code that already exists that
Caption: people are already writing with all
Caption: sorts of patterns and
Caption: add this layer over the top of that a
Caption: type system it's a superset of
Caption: javascript that can actually detect
Caption: where there's errors in the code there's
Caption: the low-hanging fruit like just spotting
Caption: typos in property names that's pretty
Caption: easy right but as the project has
Caption: evolved and matured they've added some
Caption: amazing abilities
Caption: we're at the point now in typescript
Caption: where it's probably easier to think of
Caption: the type system as itself a separate
Caption: programming language
Caption: as a programming language i would
Caption: describe it as a dsl or a domain
Caption: specific language it's a language really
Caption: specifically for
Caption: checking types for inferring checking
Caption: and proving that certain type
Caption: relationships hold
Caption: as a language it's also a purely
Caption: functional language with no side effects
Caption: and it's also turing complete so you can
Caption: actually compute anything that's
Caption: computable purely at compile time in the
Caption: type system
Caption: so
Caption: a pro of that is that it's it really
Caption: enables you to set up really really
Caption: really specific static checks so you can
Caption: shift left in all kinds of ways you can
Caption: catch a lot of errors before you even
Caption: run the program because static checks at
Caption: the end of the day are things that you
Caption: can identify just from looking at source
Caption: code you don't even have to run it
Caption: a downside of type systems that are this
Caption: this rich is that they tend to have some
Caption: pretty weird syntax that's not familiar
Caption: to us and in typescript case it's really
Caption: interesting because a lot of the types
Caption: they actually have the same syntax as
Caption: the the runtime code it mirrors but not
Caption: perfectly so you've really got a sort of
Caption: you've got that cognitive load of
Caption: learning two sets of things and a lot of
Caption: i think for a lot of people they don't
Caption: even recognize um the same control flow
Caption: constructs in the type system as in the
Caption: runtime system but they're all there
Caption: um i just grabbed one quick example of
Caption: the typescript blog and i just modified
Caption: it a little bit for this talk but this
Caption: is basically off their blog so it's not
Caption: a super complicated one but in in
Caption: javascript you might just want to have a
Caption: a simple object watcher where you could
Caption: pass in an object with some properties
Caption: in it and it will return to you a
Caption: version of that object that's still got
Caption: the original properties but it's got a
Caption: couple of callback methods that you can
Caption: attach a callback to and that will be
Caption: called when one of those properties
Caption: changes
Caption: so i've got an example there if you gave
Caption: it a just an object with an x and a y in
Caption: their numbers it would give you back an
Caption: object with the x and the y but also
Caption: it's got an x changed method and a y
Caption: changed method and you could put your
Caption: callback in there and get notified if x
Caption: changed to y change super cool and this
Caption: is a dynamic language so it would accept
Caption: any object you like and it will set up
Caption: different different properties depending
Caption: um
Caption: depending on
Caption: what those what those property names
Caption: were so we could express the runtime
Caption: code and that's what that
Caption: make watch object does i haven't put the
Caption: runtime code there like that's something
Caption: that most of us could probably figure
Caption: out um but the bottom part is a type so
Caption: we've basically got a type level
Caption: function here and we're mapping from
Caption: this the type of the source object which
Caption: typescript can see because if you pass
Caption: in an object there it can see what
Caption: properties it's got and it's going to to
Caption: it's basically a function running at the
Caption: type level it's going to actually call a
Caption: few other type level functions to do a
Caption: calculation of what these new property
Caption: names are going to be
Caption: and what their types are and
Caption: return that as the output type so that
Caption: that type is actually used
Caption: where it says t and i won't go into the
Caption: details of that but it's basically a
Caption: type level function so it can do the
Caption: same computation statically as the
Caption: program is doing dynamically
Caption: so the way that works in practice is
Caption: that you can say hey i want to make a
Caption: watched object with first name last name
Caption: and age um so if i now go person dot on
Caption: i realize now that my my previous slide
Caption: had an error and the the callback that
Caption: it adds is on but it's strongly tight
Caption: for the different um strings that you
Caption: could pass into it so i want to listen
Caption: for changes um first name changed and
Caption: then you can supply your callback that's
Caption: fine because that's valid the second two
Caption: they're errors because the first one
Caption: saying well this you can't say first
Caption: name has to be first name change and the
Caption: second one is just a plain old typo so
Caption: those are things that before they would
Caption: have just only been discovered at
Caption: runtime and now you can find them at
Caption: compile time and not only that it's not
Caption: rigid you don't have to set up separate
Caption: types for every possible different
Caption: object it's like whatever the shape of
Caption: the object is it will do a type level
Caption: function work out what the
Caption: shape of this watched object that
Caption: corresponds to will be and this kind of
Caption: thing this is a simple example but with
Caption: typescript you can go way beyond that i
Caption: would love to do
Caption: a talk on more thing cover more things
Caption: like web servers for example
Caption: um finally has everyone got their
Caption: popcorn ready
Caption: oo
Caption: versus fp
Caption: so
Caption: if this was a conference this would be
Caption: such an interesting and um controversial
Caption: topic i think that um language paradigms
Caption: which we haven't really cut touched on
Caption: yet that would be covered here language
Caption: paradigms is the closest thing our
Caption: industry has to religions
Caption: it's very dangerous to you know you've
Caption: got to watch what you say
Caption: fortunately for me i realized in running
Caption: through this talk a few times that i
Caption: wouldn't have time to really do it
Caption: justice so
Caption: sorry guys
Caption: put the popcorn away um
Caption: i did try but i really found that in a
Caption: little five minute window you really
Caption: couldn't do justice um
Caption: to
Caption: to to the debate so that one you know if
Caption: that's something that you guys are
Caption: interested in maybe i'll pitch it for
Caption: ddd next year
Caption: um i thought though you know i should at
Caption: least try and find some good trolling
Caption: quotes about um the two paradigms
Caption: you know the funny thing was it was
Caption: super easy to find them for object
Caption: oriented but it was very very hard i
Caption: could basically only find this one sort
Caption: of meme quote for um functional
Caption: languages
Caption: okay
Caption: endnote
Caption: in a nutshell
Caption: the things we're interested in
Caption: programming language design in ways that
Caption: it can actually make our lives better
Caption: and easier and safer
Caption: is convenience we want less of these
Caption: rabbit holes where you get lost trying
Caption: to find a good solution we want
Caption: convenience that we can express things
Caption: at a high level in a reasonable amount
Caption: of time and the way we do that is by
Caption: leveling up human capabilities by taking
Caption: into account human weaknesses
Caption: correctness we just want to like squeeze
Caption: bugs out of the system by design make
Caption: them less possible to even express by
Caption: shifting left
Caption: and in particular with expressive type
Caption: systems and i think when it come i
Caption: pitched that we'd look at things that
Caption: will emerge in the future this is a big
Caption: area where i think there's a lot of work
Caption: going on in programming language design
Caption: and finally we need to embrace
Caption: trade-offs so different languages
Caption: express some things better than others
Caption: and
Caption: i think it's going to always remain the
Caption: case that we should choose the the best
Caption: programming language for the job
Caption: and that's it thank you very much
Caption: thank you very much troy uh what an
Caption: engaging thought-provoking uh talk i
Caption: think one of the most gripping of today
Caption: so thank you um now we're going to open
Caption: up the floor for questions uh do we have
Caption: any questions for tori this one over
Caption: here
Caption: um what do you think drives people to be
Caption: so
Caption: uh some people to be so emotional sorry
Caption: um
Caption: i can hear you nick so i can repeat your
Caption: question if you
Caption: hello okay that's better um what do you
Caption: think drives some people to be so
Caption: emotionally attached to a certain
Caption: paradigm or a certain language
Caption: if you've seen it happen well i think
Caption: it's a like a bit of a minefield even
Caption: discussing it because i said i made an
Caption: analogy to religion and there's probably
Caption: that there's a deep analogy there so i
Caption: would say um some sometimes it's
Caption: you've you've grown up knowing one thing
Caption: all your life and it's very difficult to
Caption: hear
Caption: things that say you're wrong
Caption: and or even if you came to a certain way
Caption: of say developing software in a certain
Caption: paradigm yourself you may have invested
Caption: a lot in in doing it that way and
Caption: maybe people with really different views
Caption: from you just
Caption: you know it's risky to to embrace new
Caption: ideas sometimes because you've invested
Caption: a lot in what you already know and
Caption: typically no idea is perfect so you can
Caption: always point flaws in the other people's
Caption: way of looking at the world
Caption: so a little bit of resistance to change
Caption: in fear of the unknown i think so yeah
Caption: thanks
Caption: any other question
Caption: that's great thank you everyone um lunch
Caption: is served out in the foyer
Caption: and a big round of applause to troy
Caption: your love carries me through
Caption: all the
Caption: valleys
Caption: and the darkest places
Caption: carries
Caption: your love carries me through
Caption: all the
Caption: valleys
Caption: and the darkest places
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: do
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: sticky
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: canada needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our puzzles
Caption: this is like my dream come true i've
Caption: always wanted to join scott held
Caption: someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering i.t
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and i think that just when they see when
Caption: they see the cereal box they say okay
Caption: that's carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge math nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am
Caption: cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pinkberry
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very prominent accent
Caption: so the very completely makes sense as
Caption: for the pink no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a big background with um hello kitty
Caption: riding a unicorn
Caption: it does not reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of um sparks and enjoy and so yeah
Caption: so being very it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet and it's when people ask me how
Caption: to pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me so i'm better than
Caption: yesterday and i'll be better tomorrow
Caption: but i also get a lot of training
Caption: opportunities and planning because
Caption: there's a vast
Caption: library of training courses available
Caption: that i can just access anytime before i
Caption: join planet like when you want to learn
Caption: something google first right and then
Caption: when you google something you always
Caption: have to pay for something and that's not
Caption: that's not what i want to do so it's
Caption: really it's really good that planet
Caption: offers these free courses for me and i
Caption: don't have to feel pressured about
Caption: buying something just so i can improve
Caption: my skills and use them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top-notch
Caption: testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's really cool to be around
Caption: people who are so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to want to learn and
Caption: get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top level is the best of the best and
Caption: for me it's
Caption: if you want to grow up in your carrier
Caption: you are at the right place because we
Caption: have got all the training materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: whatever you need to progress in your
Caption: carrier you have got everything in here
Caption: to boost your experience and boost your
Caption: personality everything in a compact pack
Caption: that's what planet is for me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're sucking up
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made your dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best thing is you being back
Caption: by applying market leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services
Caption: moq digital helps clients to fully
Caption: understand their it needs adopt the
Caption: right solution and provide ongoing
Caption: support to maximize their investment
Caption: so
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: hi
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: good
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our puzzles
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero up what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering i.t
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years
Caption: people have trusted us to turn ambitious
Caption: projects into meaningful outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and i think that just when they see when
Caption: they see the cereal box they say okay
Caption: that's carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge maths nerd
Caption: uh
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am
Caption: cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pinkberry
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very permanent accent
Caption: so the very completely makes sense as
Caption: for the being no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a big background with hello kitty riding
Caption: a unicorn
Caption: it does not reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of
Caption: sparks and enjoy and so yeah so being
Caption: very it it
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet it's when people ask me how to
Caption: pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for target we
Caption: always try to go a little bit further
Caption: and we try to inspire each other by
Caption: learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me
Caption: so i'm better than yesterday and i'll be
Caption: better tomorrow i also get a lot of
Caption: training opportunities and planning
Caption: because there's a vast
Caption: library of training courses available
Caption: that i can just access anytime before i
Caption: join planet like when you want to learn
Caption: something google first right and then
Caption: when you google something you always
Caption: have to pay for something and that's not
Caption: that's not what i want to do so it's
Caption: really it's really good that planet
Caption: offers these free courses for me and i
Caption: don't have to feel pressured about
Caption: buying something just so i can improve
Caption: my skills and use them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top-notch
Caption: testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's really cool to be around
Caption: people who are so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to
Caption: want to learn and get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top one is the best of the best and for
Caption: me it's
Caption: if you want to grow up in your career
Caption: you are at the right place because we
Caption: have got all the training materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: whatever you need to progress in your
Caption: career you have got everything in here
Caption: to boost your experience and boost your
Caption: personality everything in a compact pack
Caption: that's what planet is for me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: good night
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um okay you can you can
Caption: see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made your dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best thing is you being back
Caption: by applying market leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services
Caption: moq digital helps clients to fully
Caption: understand their it needs adopt the
Caption: right solution and provide ongoing
Caption: support to maximize their investment
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hi
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott handsome
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we needed asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep and i
Caption: think our customers are gonna love it i
Caption: got a real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: hi
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering i.t
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test
Caption: engineer my call sign is special case
Caption: you might be familiar with it you see it
Caption: in cereal boxes it's my call sign
Caption: because i like eating i eat a lot when
Caption: people see me they always see me eating
Caption: and they always ask me carol why are you
Caption: eating and i think that just when they
Caption: see when they see the cereal box they
Caption: say okay that's carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge maths nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pinkberry
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very permanent accent
Caption: so the direct completely makes sense as
Caption: for the ping no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a pink background with
Caption: hello kitty riding a unicorn
Caption: it does not reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of
Caption: sparks and enjoy and so yeah so being
Caption: very it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet and it's when people ask me how
Caption: to pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me
Caption: so i'm better than yesterday and i'll be
Caption: better tomorrow i also got a lot of
Caption: training opportunities and planning
Caption: because there's a fast library of
Caption: training courses available that i can
Caption: just access anytime before i join planet
Caption: like when you want to learn something
Caption: google first right and then when you
Caption: google something you always have to pay
Caption: for something and that's not that's not
Caption: what i want to do so it's really it's
Caption: really good that planet offers these
Caption: free courses for me and i don't have to
Caption: feel pressured about buying something
Caption: just so i can improve my skills and use
Caption: them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top-notch
Caption: testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's really cool to be around
Caption: people who are so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to want to learn and
Caption: get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top one is the best of the best and for
Caption: me it's
Caption: uh if you want to grow up in your career
Caption: you are at the right place because we
Caption: have got all the training materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: yeah whatever you need to progress in
Caption: your career you have got everything in
Caption: here
Caption: to boost your experience and boost your
Caption: personality everything in a compact pack
Caption: that's what planet is for me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made your dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best friend is you being back
Caption: by applying market leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services
Caption: moq digital helps clients to fully
Caption: understand their it needs adopt the
Caption: right solution and provide ongoing
Caption: support to maximize their investment
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hi
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep and i
Caption: think our customers are gonna love it i
Caption: got a real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering it
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and
Caption: i think that just when they see when
Caption: they see the cereal box they say okay
Caption: that's carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge maths nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out on how i
Caption: never never ever ever stop talking about
Caption: maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: being the ray uh as you can tell by the
Caption: accent i am french very very permanent
Caption: accent
Caption: so the beret completely makes sense as
Caption: for the being no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a pink background with
Caption: hello kitty riding a unicorn
Caption: it does not reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of um sparks and enjoy and so yeah
Caption: so being better it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet and it's when people ask me how
Caption: to pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong work to
Caption: inspire is very something that we live
Caption: by i believe we definitely see how much
Caption: passion we are for quality and how much
Caption: we want to convey this as a client we
Caption: don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me
Caption: so i'm better than yesterday and i'll be
Caption: better tomorrow i also got a lot of
Caption: training opportunities and planning
Caption: because there's a fast
Caption: library of training courses available
Caption: that i can just access anytime before i
Caption: join planet like when you want to learn
Caption: something google first right and then
Caption: when you google something you always
Caption: have to pay for something and that's not
Caption: that's not what i want to do so it's
Caption: really it's really good that planet
Caption: offers these free courses for me and i
Caption: don't have to feel pressured about
Caption: buying something just so i can improve
Caption: my skills and use them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top-notch
Caption: testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's
Caption: really cool to be around people who are
Caption: so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to want to learn and
Caption: get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top one is the best of the best and for
Caption: me it's
Caption: uh if you want to grow up in your
Caption: carrier you are at the right place
Caption: because we have got all the training
Caption: materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: yeah whatever you need to progress in
Caption: your career you have got everything in
Caption: here
Caption: to boost your experience and boost your
Caption: personality everything in a compact pack
Caption: that's what planet is for me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made sure dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best friend is you being back
Caption: by applying market leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services
Caption: mlq digital helps clients to fully
Caption: understand their it needs adopt the
Caption: right solution and provide ongoing
Caption: support to maximize their investment
Caption: so
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on
Caption: um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you tasty to eat
Caption: for lunch
Caption: now our next speaker is trent jones his
Caption: talk is going to be about architecture
Caption: for all
Caption: trent from ai media has been designing
Caption: building and testing software for over
Caption: 10 years
Caption: across a wide wide variety of industries
Caption: he has a passion for dev ops and
Caption: inclusive software along with a lifelong
Caption: love of sharing and learning over to
Caption: trent
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: uh thank you everyone for for joining me
Caption: today so uh this is a little talk i've
Caption: been developing across a number of
Caption: different
Caption: engagements in my previous life i was a
Caption: consultant so i did a lot of
Caption: architecture diagramming and um
Caption: the various likes
Caption: uh so thank you for joining me um first
Caption: off thank you to all the sponsors today
Caption: wouldn't be possible without them all so
Caption: it's really appreciated i know they they
Caption: rock up year after year um so yeah
Caption: really appreciate them
Caption: um so i thought i'd start off with a
Caption: quote architecture represents the
Caption: significant design decisions that shape
Caption: a system
Caption: where significance is measured by the
Caption: cost of change
Caption: and the really important part here for
Caption: me is that last
Caption: part of the sentence significant is
Caption: measured by the cost of change
Caption: these decisions in your architecture
Caption: diagrams in your architecture
Caption: um
Caption: you know they have a cost associated
Caption: with them
Caption: changing them is not as simple as just
Caption: swapping a component now generally
Caption: speaking maybe you've got micro services
Caption: and it is easy but generally speaking
Caption: they're quite complex tasks
Caption: so i really like that quote it's a great
Caption: setting um
Caption: so
Caption: onto diagrams who's
Caption: audience audience participation who's
Caption: done a diagram before who's done an
Caption: architecture one
Caption: nice
Caption: how many of you have done it on a
Caption: whiteboard
Caption: mostly on a whiteboard yeah how many
Caption: have done like more professional used a
Caption: bit of software and had to store it in
Caption: the system where everyone references
Caption: cool so we're all pretty familiar with
Caption: architecture diagrams then um so some
Caption: examples
Caption: uh
Caption: this one
Caption: lots of boxes
Caption: barely any labels there's
Caption: a bunch of arrows in the middle there
Caption: that are so
Caption: close together you can't even see where
Caption: they're going um
Caption: i'm probably guilty of doing this at
Caption: some point in time there's been some
Caption: complex systems in the past
Caption: but overall you don't get a great
Caption: picture of what's going on here
Caption: there's
Caption: lots of lots of pretty colors and lots
Caption: of a few arrows but not much else to
Caption: really tell you what this system does or
Caption: how it behaves
Caption: uh what about this one
Caption: same sort of thing um it's a little bit
Caption: more spread out so it's got that going
Caption: for it um a bit better use of colors
Caption: objectively maybe perhaps
Caption: um
Caption: a few more labels again perhaps there's
Caption: there's actually a label on one of the
Caption: arrows there which
Caption: may or may not be useful to you
Caption: but at the end of the day it's still
Caption: kind of difficult to see what's going on
Caption: with this
Caption: architecture diagram
Caption: um
Caption: and then lastly i have this pretty
Caption: whiteboard drawing um this is probably
Caption: honestly the best out of all of them
Caption: it's even got some users in there down
Caption: the bottom in green uh lots of the the
Caption: arrows and the data flow is actually
Caption: labeled
Caption: um
Caption: but yeah they're all at the end of the
Caption: day they're all just boxes
Caption: that's boring what the hell are these
Caption: compo what are these actual components
Caption: is it like a an ec2 box running a
Caption: java spring boot or is it a lambda micro
Caption: service like what's actually going on in
Caption: this architecture who knows
Caption: um so
Caption: stop it don't do it anymore
Caption: don't like it
Caption: um
Caption: this is a slide that i didn't delete
Caption: when i was meant to so let's skip that
Caption: one
Caption: [Music]
Caption: my purging last night clearly missed a
Caption: slide um so i wanted to talk through a
Caption: scenario because i thought that was the
Caption: best way to kind of illustrate how we
Caption: might go about designing better
Caption: architecture diagrams so i came up with
Caption: a cannery don't ask me why my brain
Caption: works in weird ways uh so
Caption: products are randomly sampled as they go
Caption: along the conveyor belt they're tested
Caption: for anomalies and we take some action
Caption: right so there's there's something that
Caption: does that randomly random sampling uh
Caption: there's something that detects that
Caption: random sample event and actually makes a
Caption: change in the system we have to
Caption: do something to take that sample from
Caption: the
Caption: product
Caption: and then we get results back we get a
Caption: pass or fail from that sample and again
Caption: we have to take action um
Caption: if it fails if it's good then we
Caption: continue doing whatever it is a cannery
Caption: does and we profit hopefully
Caption: uh so
Caption: this is a plausible architecture right
Caption: it's not a good one i'll give you that
Caption: but it's a plausible architecture we
Caption: have a sensor
Caption: it's sending some sort of data to a
Caption: sampling engine there we have a pretty
Caption: box the box i said don't do because
Caption: boxes are not good
Caption: if the sample fails
Caption: it goes around to a staff member
Caption: don't know what sort of staff member is
Caption: it the cleaner or is it the manager like
Caption: who we actually sending that to is it
Caption: the ceo that gets the message
Caption: um and then
Caption: the staff member sends something back to
Caption: the senate what are they sending back to
Caption: the sensor um
Caption: there's not a lot of information going
Caption: on here but
Caption: i can almost guarantee that there's
Caption: architecture diagrams like this out in
Caption: the wild
Caption: um so all we can
Caption: all we can really tell from this with
Caption: any great certainty is that
Caption: when we get sample results back we would
Caption: do something with those sample results
Caption: right we could see
Caption: those uh
Caption: those data flow labels the sample pass
Caption: and sample failed that's the only real
Caption: certainty we can get out of this
Caption: architecture diagram
Caption: um so let's iterate
Caption: so now we have a production line we can
Caption: see what's actually happening here from
Caption: the production line there's there's
Caption: two-way data flow between
Caption: the random sample sensor uh which has a
Caption: better name now by the way it's not just
Caption: a sensor it's a random sample sensor
Caption: we've got really descriptive
Caption: labels associated with these things
Caption: the random sample sensor we still don't
Caption: know what it's doing it's just passing
Caption: something into a black box sampling
Caption: engine we still don't know what that
Caption: sampling engine does
Caption: we can see when it passes we actually go
Caption: and restart the or restart or continue
Caption: the production line we
Caption: that label might need some work
Caption: um
Caption: and we can see the manager at some point
Caption: presses the start button but we don't
Caption: really know when that is
Caption: so
Caption: arguably better maybe worse
Caption: um
Caption: hopefully it illustrates a point though
Caption: so now we can see that
Caption: we've got something generating a sample
Caption: event we we know a bit more about what's
Caption: happening in this system from from this
Caption: um there's probably a few other bullet
Caption: points we could include there we know
Caption: that it's running against a production
Caption: line we know that it's a manager that
Caption: takes action on this system um
Caption: overall we're starting to get a better
Caption: picture of what this whole system does
Caption: but we can do better so
Caption: let's try
Caption: um
Caption: so now we have a lot a lot more going on
Caption: here i try to run through it really
Caption: quickly for you
Caption: of keynote is we no longer have that
Caption: black box sampling engine right we have
Caption: individual components we have an sqs
Caption: queue we have a lambda that takes the
Caption: sample and does something with it we
Caption: have a
Caption: uh we can see that the sample goes and
Caption: goes through some sort of analyzing
Caption: system um
Caption: don't know what i'm not a cannery
Caption: manager so don't ask me
Caption: uh and then it gets processed by another
Caption: lambda so we know instead of that single
Caption: black box that we thought we had we
Caption: actually have
Caption: three arguably four different components
Caption: there which is
Caption: massive amounts more information that we
Caption: can convey to our our users our
Caption: stakeholders anyone who's interested in
Caption: this system brand new devs that join the
Caption: team you can go oh yeah cool we work
Caption: with you know two lambdas and an sqsq
Caption: instead of just there's this black box
Caption: and you'll eventually figure out what it
Caption: does
Caption: there's tons more information here uh we
Caption: can see when it fails we actually send a
Caption: notification to the manager it just it
Caption: doesn't just nebulously somehow get to
Caption: the manager
Caption: who then analyzes the results and
Caption: there's some subjectivity here clearly
Caption: because otherwise we wouldn't need to
Caption: analyze the results the manager probably
Caption: wouldn't even need to be involved
Caption: and then you can see that
Caption: based on analyzing the results they'll
Caption: restart the production line perhaps
Caption: there's other steps they have to take
Caption: before they can do that i would assume
Caption: they have to remove the crappy product
Caption: before they restart it
Caption: again i don't actually know how
Caption: canneries work um
Caption: but that's the basic premise right we
Caption: want to
Caption: we want to convey exactly what's
Caption: happening in this system
Caption: uh clear labels
Caption: for everything your components it's not
Caption: just a lambda it's a lambda that takes a
Caption: sample it's a lambda that processes
Caption: sample results it's very clear what
Caption: those individual components are doing
Caption: and that then helps you to convey
Caption: meaning to the rest of the people
Caption: involved in the project
Caption: so uh
Caption: this is a real world example this is
Caption: something that i used um
Caption: at a at a client this is actually part
Caption: of a smaller
Caption: bit of a smaller part of a larger
Caption: architecture so this is
Caption: one component out of
Caption: four six there was multiple vpcs peering
Caption: going on
Caption: and it was all illustrated in the
Caption: diagram where i i used a little pipe
Caption: symbol to indicate that there was
Caption: peering between the various vpcs
Caption: um you know use your imagination here
Caption: use some descript some something
Caption: descriptive that's not just a box and an
Caption: arrow to get your point across
Caption: in this particular case we're talking
Caption: about a step function you can see we're
Caption: using the diamonds to indicate decision
Caption: points in the process
Caption: the
Caption: gray box i'm hoping it's grey it's grey
Caption: on my screen a bit in the middle there
Caption: with the map states is actually a
Caption: parallel
Caption: state where
Caption: it takes multiple results and spins up
Caption: multiple lambdas concurrently
Caption: not sure that's the best representation
Caption: but at least it gets the point across
Caption: that something different is happening at
Caption: that particular part of the process
Caption: which is the goal here is we want to
Caption: communicate exactly what's happening and
Caption: you can start a discussion around that
Caption: point you can go hey
Caption: product owner we're actually spinning up
Caption: 20 lambdas here right this is very
Caption: different to just spinning up one lambda
Caption: they're all processing things
Caption: concurrently and we have to take certain
Caption: actions as a result
Caption: down the bottom you've got external
Caption: integrations with mulesoft that's as far
Caption: as i went with this particular diagram
Caption: you could go further the mulesoft
Caption: actually pointed it at sap whether that
Caption: adds value or not is is up to you
Caption: the one thing this doesn't include is
Caption: people uh
Caption: that said this system doesn't actually
Caption: really have people in the process it's a
Caption: fully automated system so perhaps not
Caption: the best example but i thought it would
Caption: be
Caption: interesting to a clue include a more
Caption: beefier example of what i'm
Caption: um
Caption: trying to
Caption: get across here
Caption: uh
Caption: cool i'm going really quick of course
Caption: so look you see really quick that's
Caption: that's basically the end of my talk so
Caption: um
Caption: the key takeaways here are
Caption: build build architecture design
Caption: architecture that includes everyone
Caption: don't build these little black boxes
Caption: that only the technical experts
Caption: understand you lose so much value your
Caption: your pos they don't know what's going on
Caption: with these little black boxes you tell
Caption: them there's a lambda that's doing
Caption: something instantly they go oh cool i
Caption: actually understand what that is you
Caption: might have to explain them how a lamb
Caption: explain to them how a lambda works but
Caption: they're going to feel more connected to
Caption: the project they're going to be more
Caption: interested in what's happening i've seen
Caption: it time and time again the good pos even
Caption: the mediocre pos they are way more
Caption: involved in the process
Caption: if you
Caption: encourage them and include them in the
Caption: whole thing
Caption: they want to be involved in this at the
Caption: end of the day that's their product
Caption: right they they want to know what's
Caption: happening with their product they are
Caption: the owners so
Caption: really encourage them
Caption: to to get involved in this process and
Caption: build a process build a build a diagram
Caption: that does encourage them to do so
Caption: things that will help you do this single
Caption: responsibility principle right
Caption: that single black box was split into two
Caption: lambdas and a q and they all did one
Caption: thing there was a lambda that took a
Caption: sample um i don't know how that works on
Caption: a cannery factory maybe they
Caption: activate a different conveyor belt
Caption: who knows but it that's all it does it
Caption: just takes a sample when it responds to
Caption: that random sampling event and then the
Caption: other lambda that processes the results
Caption: and says it's a pass or a fail right
Caption: that's all it does it figures out
Caption: whether the results are a pass or a fail
Caption: it is very simple architecture it's easy
Caption: to understand
Caption: and everybody can understand it which is
Caption: the whole point we want people to
Caption: understand we want people to go oh can i
Caption: add this particular component what's the
Caption: impact of this particular feature or
Caption: change to the system and if they
Caption: understand the whole system they're
Caption: going to be able to have more of a
Caption: meaningful discussion with you about
Caption: that
Caption: readability and discoverability i
Caption: mentioned earlier in the talk new devs
Caption: new devs are going to understand
Caption: this
Caption: a lot quicker than if i just did that
Caption: black box outside or maybe the
Caption: the
Caption: event bridge and the step function right
Caption: having all the individual components is
Caption: going to be way easier to understand and
Caption: get them up to speed and that's what we
Caption: want right we don't want to have to
Caption: spend a month teaching the new dev all
Caption: the different parts of the system we're
Caption: going to go hey we need to make this
Caption: change to lambda xyz go make that change
Caption: and they can go do it without any
Caption: other involvement so
Caption: it's a really great way of onboarding
Caption: people quick and everyone getting up to
Caption: speed and everyone understanding the
Caption: system
Caption: and the last thing i've kind of already
Caption: touched on these opportunities to
Caption: enhance your workflow right you're not
Caption: always going to see everything just
Caption: because you're the architect doesn't
Caption: mean you always know best just because
Caption: you're the senior dev or the tech lead
Caption: just because you're the po doesn't mean
Caption: you know
Caption: the best workflow here by having an
Caption: architecture that everybody understands
Caption: you can all work together and spot
Caption: opportunities to
Caption: improve the workflow to enhance the
Caption: workflow to add new business cases and
Caption: value to that workflow
Caption: and that's it that's me so
Caption: thank you very much for coming to my
Caption: talk and
Caption: question time
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: thank you very much trent so it's not
Caption: only about making inclusive software for
Caption: your customers it's about making
Caption: inclusive systems so you can basically
Caption: communicate better with the team people
Caption: that you're working with all the way
Caption: through from exec to
Caption: junior developer
Caption: very good thank you now we're going to
Caption: open the floor up for some q a's has
Caption: anyone got a question
Caption: just up the front
Caption: possibly a a loaded question um have you
Caption: have you heard of the uh c4 model of uh
Caption: architecture diagrams recently yes yes
Caption: yeah very similar i i considered adding
Caption: that to this talk and you could uh if we
Caption: look at uh say this particular model you
Caption: could you could probably apply that here
Caption: and say the um you know the two big
Caption: black boxes are one level of the c4 and
Caption: then you drill down another level and
Caption: you get a
Caption: view of the uh event bridge and the step
Caption: function and the database and then
Caption: another level and you get the internals
Caption: of the step function and that would
Caption: apply there um
Caption: but
Caption: yeah uh
Caption: organically came to the same conclusions
Caption: apparently i only discovered it in the
Caption: last couple of months you've reinvented
Caption: it
Caption: we discovered it ourselves about a year
Caption: ago oh nice yeah how's it working for
Caption: you that's brilliant yeah nice excellent
Caption: yeah it basically what you showed there
Caption: it really opens up the magic black box
Caption: yeah um
Caption: and uh yeah more people can understand
Caption: the system and once you do that more
Caption: people go hang on actually that's a bit
Caption: crap yeah
Caption: yeah it leads to an improved system
Caption: though when they say that right so yeah
Caption: it's good cool thank you
Caption: any more questions any more questions
Caption: um have you got any advice for people
Caption: who are reviewing someone else's
Caption: architecture diagram any sort of red
Caption: flags to look out for and that sort of
Caption: thing
Caption: oh yeah that's a good one no boxes
Caption: [Laughter]
Caption: um
Caption: yeah look i
Caption: uh
Caption: i can't think of anything off the top
Caption: i've not done a lot of reviews right i
Caption: um i tend to either pick something up
Caption: and
Caption: try and figure out what's going on or
Caption: i'll be building the diagram myself i
Caption: guess the only thing i would
Caption: perhaps consider when doing a review is
Caption: maybe build it yourself do the diagram
Caption: yourself and see what the differences
Caption: are and
Caption: make sure that you have actually
Caption: captured all the aspects of the system
Caption: might be a good way of doing it but yeah
Caption: i've never done reviews before so that's
Caption: purely guesswork unfortunately
Caption: any more questions
Caption: um are there any particular tools
Caption: that you found sort of helpful or useful
Caption: in terms of your architecture diagrams
Caption: yeah look i mean there's definitely
Caption: tools out there that will generate a lot
Caption: of this stuff for you um
Caption: there was
Caption: i can't remember the name of it there
Caption: was a recent one that works really well
Caption: with um arm templates and and the azure
Caption: system um i'm not sure if there's
Caption: equivalent for aws
Caption: uh these particular di or
Caption: the um the big real world diagram i did
Caption: that in sorry i just realized i'm not on
Caption: the screen it's there
Caption: the big real world diagram i did that in
Caption: vizio uh it has all the nice icons and
Caption: everything else to work with whatever
Caption: platform you're using um but draw io as
Caption: well
Caption: free open source has same set of
Caption: pictures and diagrams and everything
Caption: else
Caption: and you can sync it to dropbox and
Caption: onedrive and all the rest and and
Caption: they're really useful tools
Caption: um
Caption: i haven't used lucid but i do do know of
Caption: lucid yeah
Caption: yeah
Caption: they're the most tools i know about
Caption: any more questions
Caption: no okay well thank you very much
Caption: everyone
Caption: served outside and
Caption: don't forget there will be
Caption: the lock note speaker in the main
Caption: theater
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: woops what mark where are you mark open
Caption: you turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: my dream come true i've always wanted to
Caption: join
Caption: someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: let's go
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we got a little
Caption: problem as you know our motto is you
Caption: need a professional bodyguard delivered
Caption: to your door in less than half an hour
Caption: you've got it buddy but without an app
Caption: ain't no bodyguard getting delivered
Caption: nowhere so where are we with that uh the
Caption: app is almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption:
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: my dream come true i've always wanted to
Caption: join
Caption: someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering i.t
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and
Caption: i think that when they see when they see
Caption: the cereal box they say okay that's
Caption: carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge math nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pink beret
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very permanent accent
Caption: so the very completely makes sense as
Caption: for the ping no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a big background with
Caption: hello kitty riding a unicorn
Caption: it does not reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of
Caption: sparks and enjoy and so yeah so being
Caption: better it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet and it's when people ask me how
Caption: to pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring